< synopsis > In 1947 , ( ) , a banker in , is convicted of murdering his wife and her , a golf pro . Since the state of has no death penalty , he is given two consecutive life sentences and sent to the notoriously harsh . keeps claiming his innocence , but his cold and calculating demeanor leads everyone to believe he did it . Meanwhile , ( ) , known as is being interviewed for parole after having spent 20 years at for murder . Despite his best efforts and behavior , 's parole is rejected which does n't phase him all that much . is then introduced as the local smuggler who can get inmates anything they want within reason . An alarm goes off alerting all prisoners of new arrivals . and his friends bet on whichever new fish will have a nervous break down during his first night in prison . Red places a huge bet on . During the first night , an overweight newly arrived inmate , nicknamed '' ass ' , breaks down and cries hysterically allowing ( ) to win the bet . However , the celebration is short lived when the chief guard , ( ) , savagely beats up the fat man for not keeping quiet when he is asked to . Meanwhile , remains steadfast and composed . The next morning , the inmates learn that '' ass '' died in the infirmary because the prison doctor had been out for the night . inquires about the man 's name only to get put down by . About a month later , approaches having heard of his talents for finding things . He asks to find him a rock hammer , an instrument he claims is necessary for his hobby of rock collecting and sculpting . asks a few questions about his intentions which laughs off . agrees to place the order and also warns about '' the sisters '' , a group of prisoners who sexually assaults other prisoners , most importantly their leader , ( ) who has a crush on . Though other prisoners consider " a really cold fish , " sees something in , and likes him from the start . thinks intends to use the hammer to engineer an escape in the future but when he finally sees the tool 's actual size , he understands why laughed and laughs too , putting aside the thought that could ever use it to dig his way out of prison . During the first two years of his incarceration , spends most of his time working in the prison laundry or fighting off and the . Though he persistently resists and fights them every time , is beaten and raped on a regular basis but keeps quiet about it . When a work detail for tarring the roof of one of the prison 's buildings is announced , pulls some strings to get and a few of their mutual friends assigned to the job , giving everyone a break from the usual . During the job overhears complaining about having to pay taxes for an upcoming inheritance . Drawing from his expertise as a banker , lets know how he can shelter his money from the by turning it into a one - time gift for his wife . He then offers to assist in filling out the paperwork in exchange for some cold beers for his fellow inmates while on the tarring job . first threatens to throw off the roof , but eventually agrees and do provide the working inmates with cold beers before the job is finished . Red remarks that may have engineered the privilege to build favor with the prison guards as much as with his fellow inmates , but he also thinks did it simply to " feel normal again . "While watching a movie , approaches with another unusual demand and asks for the actress . is surprised by the demand but agrees to place the order . As he exits the theater , once more encounters the . Although he is able to talk his way out of being raped , he is brutally beaten within an inch of his life , putting him in the infirmary for a month . spends a week in solitary for the beating . When he comes out , he finds and his men waiting in his cell . They beat him so badly that he 's left unable to walk or eat solid food for the rest of his life and is transferred to a prison hospital upstate . The move on and never bother again . When gets out of the infirmary , he finds a bunch of rocks for him to and a giant poster of in his cell ; presents from and his friends . ( ) hears about how helped and uses a surprise cell inspection to size up . He finds reading his copy of the and they talk about their favorite verses while the guards are turning the cell upside down looking for illegal possessions . Satisfied with their encounter , the warden leaves and almost forget to give his back . He then encourages to keep reading the saying that '' Salvation lays . is later advised that he will now work in the prison library with aging inmate ( ) . The reason for his transfer is made obvious when a prison guard shows up asking for financial advising . sets - up a makeshift desk and starts working , providing financial advising to most prison guards and helping them with their income tax returns . also sees an opportunity to expand the prison library ; he starts by asking the state senate for funds . He writes letters every week . His financial support practice is so appreciated that even guards from other prisons , when they visit for inter - prison baseball matches , seek 's financial expertise . Even the warden himself has preparing his tax returns . Not long afterwards , snaps and threatens to kill in order to avoid being paroled . is able to talk him down . When his friends discuss ' behavior , sympathizes with having obviously become " institutionalized , " after spending 50 years at . He has become essentially conditioned to be a prisoner for the rest of his life and is unable to adapt to the outside world . Red remarks : " These walls are funny . First you hate 'em , then you get used to 'em . Enough time passes , you get so you depend on them . " is paroled and goes to live in a halfway house . He is also given a job at a supermarket which he hates . Finding it impossible to adjust to life outside the prison , he eventually commits suicide , leaving the message " was here " carved on a wooden beam .After six years of writing letters , receives $ 200 from the state for the library , along with a collection of old books and phonograph records . Though the state thinks this will be enough to get to halt his letter - writing campaign , he is undaunted and redoubles his efforts . When the donations of old books and records arrive at the 's office , finds a copy of 's The of among the records . He locks the guard assigned to the 's office in the bathroom and plays the record over the prison 's system . The entire prison is soon captivated by the music . Red remarks that the voices of these women made everyone feel free , if only for a brief moment . Outside the office , appears furious at the act of defiance , and orders to turn off the record player . responds by turning up the volume . The warden orders to break into the office and is sent immediately to solitary confinement for two weeks . When he gets out , he tells his friends that the stretch was the " easiest time " he ever did in the hole because he spent it with 's stuck in his head for comfort . When the other prisoners tell him how unlikely that is , he talks about the power that hope can have in prison and that hope can sustain them . strongly disagrees with , claiming that hope is a dangerous thing in a place like and tells he should get used to living without it . implies that this is exactly what did and leaves the table angry . Not long after , has a new parole hearing and realizes he 's been in prison for 30 years now . He uses the exact same words he used ten years earlier only with no enthusiasm at all . His parole is rejected again . gives him an harmonica to commemorate his 30 years which replies by offering a giant poster of to commemorate his 10 years . About four years after the incident , the state finally comes to the conclusion that they wo n't get rid of with just another check . So they allow him a budget of $ 500 a year to build his library . uses it wisely and makes deals with book clubs and charities to create the best prison library in the state and names it after . With the enlarged library and more materials , begins to mentor inmates who want to receive their high school diplomas so they can get a decent job once they 're out . Meanwhile , profits from 's knowledge and devises a scheme whereby he puts prison inmates to work on public projects which he wins by outbidding other contractors ( prisoners are cheap labor ) . Occasionally , he allows other contractors to score projects as long as the bribe is good enough . launders the money by setting up several accounts in several banks , along with several investments , using the fake identity of , a man who only exist on papers , created by himself through his knowledge of the system and mail ordered forms . officially has a birth certificate , social security number and driving license . Should anyone ever investigate about the scheme ; they will chase a man who only exists on paper . shares the details with , noting that he had to " go to prison to learn how to be a crook . 1965 , a young prisoner named ( ) comes to to serve time for breaking and entering . is easy going , charismatic , and popular among the other inmates and is befriended by both and . When explains that he 's been going in and out of prison ever since he was 13 years old , suggests that should consider another line of work besides theft because he seems to be not so good at it . The suggestion really gets to and he asks to help him work on earning his high school equivalency diploma . Though is a good student , he is still frustrated when he takes the exam itself , crumpling it up and tossing it in the trash . retrieves it and sends it in anyway . asks about 's case which explains . Upon hearing the story , is visibly upset . He then tells and the story of a former cellmate of his from another prison who boasted about killing a man who was a pro golfer at the country club he worked at , along with his lover . The woman 's husband , a banker , had gone to prison for those murders . With this new information , , full of hope , meets with the warden , expecting to help him get a new trial with as a witness . The reaction from is completely contrary to what hoped for . When says emphatically that he would never reveal the money laundering schemes he set up for over the years , the warden becomes furious and orders him to solitary for a month . The inmates discuss the sentence mentioning it is the longest time in solitary that they 've ever heard of . They also realize that may truly be innocent after all and has spent almost 20 years in prison for a crime he did n't commit . receives a letter from the board of education announcing that he has passed the exam and now owns a high school diploma . A guard pass the news to in his solitary cell which makes him smile a little . Later on , is escorted outside at night to have a private meeting with the warden . asks him if the story he told is true and if he would be willing to testify on 's behalf . enthusiastically agrees . The warden smiles at him before nodding to to shoot him dead . When the warden visits in solitary , he tells him that tried to escape and that had no choice but to shoot him . does n't buy that story and tells that '' everything '' stops and that he 's not going to work for him anymore . The warden threatens to shut down the library , burn all the books , and move to a much different cell in a much different part of the prison with the most hardened criminals should he stop working for him . He then leaves and orders to another month in to think about things . When finally comes out of solitary , he and have a conversation where talks about his wife and how much he loved her and feels responsible for her death even though he did n't pulled the trigger . He then talks about his projects should he ever get out of prison . He talks about , a beach town on the coast of where he 'd like to live for the rest of his life and manage a hotel there . He then asks if he 'd join him to which says no and that he believes he is too far gone like . He then criticizes for allowing hope to mess with his mind like that and that it will only destroy him . agrees and is about to leave when he asks if he knows the , area . He then tells about a very specific hay field where there is a large oak tree at the end of a stone wall . He then asks to promise him that , should he ever get paroled , he will seek that oak tree and retrieve something that was hidden among the stones but refuses to say what it is . Red promises but is worried about his friend 's state of mind . His worries are heightened further when he learns that has asked for a six - foot rope . believes may have finally reached his breaking point and is about to commit suicide . Meanwhile , asks to shine his shoes for him and put his suit in for dry - cleaning before retiring for the night . Andy returns to his cell and the guards turn the lights off for the night . Red remarks that it was the longest night of his life . The following morning , has not answered the morning call and is not standing in front of his cell like every morning . The guard yells at for putting him late and walks to his cell expecting to find a seriously sick or dead . At the same time , becomes alarmed when he finds 's shoes in his shoe box instead of his own . The alarm then goes off announcing a missing inmate . rushes to 's empty cell and demands an explanation . brings in , but insists he knows nothing of 's plans . Becoming increasingly hostile and paranoid , starts throwing 's sculpted rocks around the cell . When he throws one at 's poster of ( in the spot previously occupied by , and before that by ) , the rock punches through and into the wall . tears the poster from the wall revealing a tunnel just wide enough for a man to crawl into . It is revealed in a series of flashback sequences narrated by that many years ago , not long after receiving his rock hammer , innocently tried to carve his name on his cell wall when a chunk of it came off . , being a fan of geology , realized that the material the wall was made off of could make it possible for him to dig a hole in case he ever needed to escape . first ordered the giant poster of to hide the hole . He then spent years digging at night with his rock hammer and hiding the dirt from his job into his pockets which he would then empty in the courtyard during his morning walks . When was killed , decided it was time to go . During the previous night 's thunderstorm , wore 's clothes underneath his own to his cell , catching a lucky break when no one notices 's shiny black shoes on his feet , including . He packed many of his belongings , some papers and 's clothes into a plastic bag which he tied to himself with the rope he 'd asked for , and escaped through his hole . The tunnel he 'd excavated led him to a space between two walls of the prison where he found a sewer main line . Using a rock , he hit the sewer line in time several times with the lightning strikes and eventually broke it open . After crawling through 500 yards of the raw sewage contained in the pipe , emerged in a brook outside the walls . A search team later found his prison clothes , a bar of soap and a very worn out rock hammer . While the warden and are discovering 's genius escape , walks into the in , where he had put 's money . Using his assumed identity as , and with all the necessary documentation , he closes the account and walks out with a cashier 's check . Before he leaves , he asks them to drop a package in the mail . He continues his visitations to nearly a dozen other local banks , ending up with some $ 370,000 . The package contains 's accounting books , which are delivered straight to the newspaper along with 's written confessions and testimony . Not long after , the state police storm along with several reporters to cover the developing story . is arrested for the murder of and is taken away by the state police . According to , he heard unfounded rumors through the grapevine that allegedly started " crying like a little girl " in the back seat of the police squad car while he was being taken away . Seeing being taken away in a police squad car and the local district attorney entering the prison with several policemen holding a warrant for 's arrest , finally opens his safe in his office , which he had n't touched since escaped , and instead of his books , he finds the he had given with a note to the warden saying that he was right , " salvation did lay within " . then opens it to the book of and finds that the pages had all been cut out in the shape of 's rock hammer . walks back to his desk as the police pound on his door , takes out a small revolver and commits suicide by shooting himself in the head . Red remarks that he wondered if the warden thought , right before pulling the trigger , how " could ever have gotten the best of him . "Shortly after , receives a postcard from , , with nothing written on it . takes it as a sign that made it into to freedom . and his buddies kill time talking about 's exploits ( with a few embellishments ) , but falls into a sort of depression from missing his friend . At 's next parole hearing in 1967 , he talks to the parole board about how " rehabilitated " is just a made - up word invented to justify their job . He then explains how much he regrets his actions of the past , not because he 's in jail but because he knows how wrong it was . He then closes by saying that he has to live with that for the rest of his life and ask the board to stop wasting his time and leave him alone . His parole is finally granted . He goes to live and work at the same places that did , even seeing ' message carved into the wooden beam . He frequently walks by a pawn shop which has several guns in the window . At times he contemplates trying to get back into prison feeling that he has no life outside of prison where he has spent most of his adult life , but he remembers the promise he made to . He then reveals that he was not looking at the guns but at the compasses behind the guns and he bought one . follows 's instructions , hitchhiking to and finding the stone wall described . Just as said , there is a large black stone . is a small box containing a large sum of cash and instructions to come find him in although he does n't name the city just in case . He also says he needs somebody " who can get things " for a " project " of his . suddenly understands all the power of hope and feels exhilarated by the feelings inside of him . After carving a new message in the wooden beam which reads : " was here , so was " , violates parole and leaves the halfway house , unconcerned since no one is likely to do an extensive manhunt for " an old crook like [ him ] . " takes a bus to , where he crosses into . The two friends are finally reunited on a beach of the coast , just like had been hoping for.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > In late summer 1945 , guests are gathered for the wedding reception of 's daughter ( ) and ( ) . ( ) , the head of the family , is known to friends and associates as " . " He and ( ) , the family lawyer , are hearing requests for favors because , according to Italian tradition , " no can refuse a request on his daughter 's wedding day . " One of the men who asks the for a favor is , a successful mortician and acquaintance of the , whose daughter was brutally beaten by two young men because she refused their advances ; the men received minimal punishment from the presiding judge . The is disappointed in , who 'd avoided most contact with the due to 's nefarious business dealings . The 's wife is godmother to 's shamed daughter , a relationship the uses to extract new loyalty from the undertaker . The agrees to have his men punish the young men responsible ( in a non - lethal manner ) in return for future service if necessary . Meanwhile , the 's youngest son ( ) , a decorated hero returning from service , arrives at the wedding and tells his girlfriend ( ) anecdotes about his family , informing her about his father 's criminal life ; he reassures her that he is different from his family and does n't plan to join them in their criminal dealings . The wedding scene serves as critical exposition for the remainder of the film , as introduces the main characters to . ( ) , 's next older brother , is a bit dim - witted and quite drunk by the time he finds at the party . , who is nicknamed ( ) , the 's eldest child and next in line to become upon his father 's retirement , is married but he is a hot - tempered philanderer who sneaks into a bedroom to have sex with one of 's bridesmaids , ( ) . is not related to the family by blood but is considered one of the 's sons because he was homeless when he befriended in the neighborhood of and the took him in and saw to 's upbringing and education . Now a talented attorney , is being groomed for the important position of consigliere ( counselor ) to the , despite his non - Sicilian heritage . Also among the guests at the celebration is the famous singer ( ) , 's godson , who has come from to petition 's help in landing a movie role that will revitalize his flagging career . ( ) , the head of the studio , denies the part ( a character much like himself ) , which will make him an even bigger star , but explains to : " I 'm gon na make him an offer he ca n't refuse . " The also receives congratulatory salutations from , a terrifying enforcer in the criminal underworld , and fills a request from the baker , , who made 's wedding cake who wishes for his nephew to become an American citizen . After the wedding , is dispatched to to meet with , but angrily tells him that he will never cast in the role . holds a grudge because Fontane seduced and " ruined " a starlet who had been grooming for stardom and with whom he had a sexual relationship . is persuaded to give the role , however , when he wakes up early the next morning and feels something wet in his bed . He pulls back the sheets and finds himself in a pool of blood ; he screams in horror when he discovers the severed head of his prized $ 600,000 stud horse , , in the bed with him . ( A deleted scene from the film implies that ( ) , 's top " button man " or , is 's return , the family meets with " The " ( ) , who is being backed by the rival family . He asks for financing as well as political and legal protection for importing and distributing heroin . Despite the huge profit to be made , refuses , explaining that his political influence would be jeopardized by a move into the narcotics trade -- the judges and politicians he 's allied himself with over the course of several decades would renounce their friendships with him if he were to enter the drug trade . The 's eldest son , , who had earlier urged the family to enter the narcotics trade , breaks rank during the meeting and begins to question 's assurances as to the 's investment being guaranteed by the . His father , angry at 's dissension in a non - family member 's presence , silences Sonny with a single look and privately rebukes him later . then dispatches to infiltrate 's organization and report back with information . During the meeting , while is bent over to allow to light his cigarette , he is stabbed in the hand by , and is subsequently garroted by an assassin . Soon after his meeting with , is gunned down in an assassination attempt just outside his office , and it is not immediately known whether he has survived . had been assigned driving and protection duty for his father when , the 's usual bodyguard , had called in sick . proves to be ineffectual , fumbling with his gun and unable to shoot back . When hears about the being shot and 's absence , he orders ( ) , one of his father 's two " caporegimes , " to find and bring him to the 's house . Sollozzo abducts and holds him for several hours , persuading him to offer the deal previously offered to his father . When is released , gets word that the has survived the attempt on his life . He angrily tells to convince to accept his offer . Enraged , refuses to consider it and issues an ultimatum to the : turn over or face a lengthy , bloody and costly ( for both sides ) gang war . They refuse , and instead send " a Sicilian message , " in the form of two fresh fish wrapped in 's bullet - proof vest , telling the that " sleeps with the fishes . later takes and one of the family 's hitmen , , for a drive into . wants to " go to the mattresses " -- set up beds in apartments for button men to operate out of in the event that the crime war breaks out . On their way back from , has stop the car in a remote area so he can urinate . shoots dead ; he and leave and the car behind . , whom the other families consider a " civilian " and not involved in mob business , visits his father at a small private hospital after having dinner with at her hotel . He is shocked to find that no one is guarding him -- a nurse tells him that the men were interfering with hospital policy and were told to leave by the police about 10 minutes before 's arrival . Realizing that his father is again being set up to be killed , he calls for help , moves his father to another room , and goes outside to watch the entrance . enlists help from the baker ( ) , who has come to the hospital to pay his respects . Together , they bluff away 's men as they drive by . Police cars soon appear bringing the corrupt ( ) , who viciously punches in the cheek and breaks his jaw when insinuates that paid to set up his father . Just then , arrives with " private detectives " licensed to carry guns to protect , and he takes the injured home . Sonny responds by having ( ) , the eldest son and underboss of ( ) , killed ( off - camera).Following the attempt on the 's life at the hospital , requests a meeting with the , which will attend as 's bodyguard . When volunteers to kill both men during the meeting , and the other senior members are amused ; however , convinces them that he is serious and that killing and is in the family 's interest : " It 's not personal . It 's strictly business . " Because is considered a civilian , he wo n't be regarded as a suspicious ambassador for the . Although police officers are usually off limits for hits , argues that since is corrupt and has illegal dealings with , he is fair game . also implies that newspaper reporters that the have on their payroll would delight in publishing stories about a corrupt police captain . meets with , who prepares a small pistol for him , covering the trigger and grip with tape to prevent any fingerprint evidence . He instructs about the proper way to perform the assassination and tells him to leave the gun behind . He also tells that the family were all very proud of for becoming a war hero during his service in the and that a war like the impending one that 's and 's killings will spark is necessary about every five to tens years to clean out the ambition and resentment that builds between the . shows great confidence that can perform the job and tells him it will all go smoothly . The plan is to have the 's informers find out the location of the meeting and plant the revolver before , and arrive . Before he leaves for the meeting , tells he 'll get word to about not saying goodbye . Before the meeting in a small Italian restaurant in the , frisks for weapons and finds him clean . After a few minutes where and converse in , excuses himself to go to the bathroom , where he retrieves the planted revolver . Returning to the table , he fatally shoots , then . is sent to hide in while the family prepares for all - out warfare with the ( who are united against the ) as well as a general clampdown on the mob by the police and government authorities . Three months later , when the don returns home from the hospital , he is distraught to learn that it was who killed and . Meanwhile , and 's marriage is disintegrating . They argue frequently over 's suspected infidelity and his possessive behavior toward . By Italian tradition , nobody , not even a high - ranking , can intervene in a married couple 's personal disputes , even if they involve infidelity , money , or domestic abuse . One day , sees a bruise on 's face and she tells him that hit her after she asked him if he was having an affair . Sonny tracks down and severely beats in the middle of a crowded street for brutalizing the pregnant , and threatens to kill if he ever harms again . An angry responds by plotting with and ( ) , the ' chief rivals , to have killed . Later , has one of his mistresses phone his house , knowing that will answer . The woman asks to tell not to meet her tonight . The very pregnant and distraught throws a tantrum , throwing the plates with their dinner around the dining room and kitchen . takes advantage of the altercation to beat in order to lure out in the open and away from the compound . When phones the compound to tell that has beaten her again , the enraged drives off ( alone and unprotected ) to fulfill his threat against . On the way to and 's house , is ambushed at a toll booth on the and violently shot to death by several carloads of hitmen wielding sub - machine guns . relays the news of 's massacre to the , who calls in the favor from to personally handle the embalming of 's body . Rather than seek revenge for 's killing , meets with the heads of the to negotiate a cease - fire . Not only is the conflict draining all their assets and threatening their survival , but ending it is the only way that can return home safely . Reversing his previous decision , agrees that the family will provide political protection for 's traffic in heroin , as long as it is controlled and not sold to children . At the meeting , deduces that , not , was ultimately behind the start of the mob war and 's death , despite showing early signs of senility . In , patiently waits out his exile , protected by ( ) , an old family friend . aimlessly wanders the countryside , accompanied by his ever - present bodyguards , ( ) and ( ) . In a small village , meets and falls in love with ( ) , the beautiful young daughter of a bar owner . They court and marry in the traditional Sicilian fashion , but soon 's presence becomes known to enemies . One day , while is teaching his new bride to drive , brings the bad news about 's assassination . He wants to movie to a safer location . As the couple is about to leave , is killed as a result of a rigged car ( originally intended for ) exploding on ignition ; , who saw the car explode , spots hurriedly leaving the grounds seconds before the explosion , implicating him in the assassination plot . ( In a deleted scene , is found years later and killed.)With his safety guaranteed , returns home . More than a year later , in 1950 , he reunites with his former girlfriend after a total of four years of separation -- three in and one in . He tells her he wants them to be married . Although is hurt that he waited so long to contact her , she accepts his proposal . With semi - retired , dead , and middle brother considered incapable of running the family business , is now in charge ; he promises he will make the family business completely legitimate within five years . Two years later , and ( ) , complain that they are being pushed around by the and ask permission to strike back , but denies the request . He plans to move the family operations to and after that , and may break away to form their own families in the area . further promises 's husband , , that he will be his right hand man in ( had grown up there ) , unaware of his part in 's assassination . has been removed as consigliere and is now merely the family 's lawyer , with serving as consigliere . Privately , Hagen inquires about his change in status , and also questions about a new regime of " soldiers " secretly being built under ( ) . explains to that is acting on his advice . Another year or so later , travels to and meets with ( ) , a rich and shrewd casino boss looking to expand his business dealings . After the 's attempted assassination , had been sent to to learn about the casino business from . arrogantly offers to buy out but is rudely rebuffed . believes the are weak and that he can secure a better deal from . As and heatedly negotiate , sides with . After storms out of the meeting , warns to never again " take sides with anyone against the family . returns home . In a private moment , explains his expectation that the 's enemies will attempt to murder by using a trusted associate to arrange a meeting as a pretext for assassination . also reveals that he had never really intended a life of crime for , hoping that his youngest son would hold legitimate power as a senator or governor . Some months later , collapses and dies while playing with his young grandson ( ) in his tomato garden . At the burial , conveys a proposal for a meeting with , which identifies as the traitor that was expecting . asks if he 'll agree to be godfather to and 's newborn son . agrees and seizes the opportunity to eliminate competition from the other five families while also using the baptism as an alibi . The murders occur simultaneously during the ceremony : ( ) is gunned down along with his bodyguard in a hotel elevator by a shotgun - wielding . is killed while having a massage , shot through the eye by an unidentified assassin . ( ) is trapped in a revolving door at the and shot dead by soldier ( is assassinated in bed , along with a prostitute , by and an unknown associate . is killed on the steps of his office building along with his bodyguard and driver , shot by ( ) , disguised in his old police uniform . After the baptism , believes he and are on their way to the meeting between and that he has arranged . Instead , he is surrounded by and other button men as Hagen steps away . Realizing that has uncovered his betrayal , tells that he always respected , and that his disloyalty " was only business . " He asks if can get him off for " old times ' sake , " but says he can not . is driven away and never seen again ( it is implied that shoots and kills with his own gun after he disarms him prior to entering the car).Meanwhile , confronts about 's murder and forces him to admit his role in setting up the ambush , having been approached by himself . ( The hitmen who killed were the core members of 's personal bodyguard . ) assures he will not be killed , but his punishment is exclusion from all family business . He hands a plane ticket to exile in . However , when gets into a car headed for the airport , he is immediately garroted to death by , on 's orders . Later , a hysterical confronts at the compound as movers carry away the furniture in preparation for the family move to . She accuses him of murdering in retribution for 's brutal treatment of her and for 's suspected involvement in 's murder and that craftily waited until their father died so could n't stop him . After is removed from the house , questions about 's accusation , but he refuses to answer , reminding her to never ask him about his business or what he does for a living . She insists , and outright lies , reassuring his wife that he played no role in 's death . believes him and is relieved . The film ends with and new caporegimes and arriving and paying their respects to . kisses 's hand and greets him as " . " As watches , the office door is > 

 < synopsis > The movie begins with a gang of men with clown masks breaking into the bank where the mob has a large portion of their money stashed . It begins with five clowns , each getting a cut of the spoils . They suggest that a sixth member of the gang - nicknamed ' The ' - who did the planning , but sat out the robbery , does n't deserve a cut . As the robbery goes on , the clowns begin to kill each other in order to get a larger cut , until a school bus crashes through the wall of the bank , killing another clown . A mob bank manager , who was himself shot with an automatic weapon after he tried to take out the clowns with a shotgun , tells the remaining clown that he does n't know who he is dealing with . The clown kneels down and tells the banker , " I believe whatever does n't kill you simply makes you ... stranger ... " then removes his mask to reveal that he himself is The . puts a grenade into the banker 's mouth and boards the bus , leaving a cord attached to the pin . The bus pulls out with all of the bank 's cash and the pin pops out . It is just a gas grenade . The joins a long line of school buses leaving the scene as the police arrive . is then seen at night with criminals afraid to commit crimes under the watchful sign of the batsignal projected onto the clouds . We see manning the batsignal , waiting for with . , who asks if he 's coming . explains that it is okay if he is not , hoping that he is busy elsewhere . He asks about ' mother , who 's in the hospital . Meanwhile , in a parking garage , the , still at - large after escaping , is negotiating with the Russian mob members , led by The , over the sale of some of his fear - inducing drugs . The sale is interrupted when some of 's citizens dressed as wanna - be 's begin shooting at the men . As he gases one of the fake Batmen with his mind - altering drugs from his cuff , the notes that they are not the real , because would never use a gun . Suddenly the / crashes through a barricade and notes , " That 's more like it ! " The , pre - programmed to " LOITER " and then " " , fires rockets into a nearby office , sending the remaining mobsters running . The real arrives on the scene and bends the rifle barrel of one of the wanna - be Batmen before knocking him out . The sends his rottweilers to attack the Batmen , and as saves them he takes the dogs out after being badly bitten in the arm . The attempts to flee in a white van but jumps onto the and begins cutting into the side with his device called the mangler . Scarecrow swerves into a support which sends to the ground . As gets away down a spiraling passageway , leaps onto the roof of his van , smashing it to a halt . He leaves the fake and the along with some of the mobsters tied up together for the police to eventually round up . When one of the impostors says he 's trying to help , harshly tells him he does n't need any help . arrives at the bank the held up earlier with who shows him the 's picture from a security camera . arrives to inspect the scene , noting that they have irradiated the drug money to make it easier to trace . When asks him if the is a threat , informs him that he can not worry about one man when there is an entire mob to bring down . The next day , as stitches himself up from the dog bite , offers his concerns , warning to ' know his limits ' . He notices keeping a close watch on newly appointed district attorney via some computer screens , as is trying to decide whether or not can be trusted . wonders if he is really spying on the relationship that has developed with . arrives in court to join in prosecuting mobster , the alleged new leader of the crime family . One of 's men takes the fall in court , and attempts to shoot from the witness stand . The gun does n't go off and punches the man before he is hauled off to jail . is eventually set free , to the dismay of . meets , and after a short exchange of words , they both express their distrust for those that are working in each other 's offices . Harvey interrogates over his involvement with the and tells him he wants to meet him . requests search warrants for five banks that are believed to be holding the remainder of the money . agrees to back 's search warrants , forming a tenuous trust with the honest , who in turn hails as 's " " while Dent questions about another nickname they had for him when he was at , a nickname claims to have no knowledge of . holds a board meeting at , negotiating an joint venture with , the head of , based in . After the meeting with , expresses his reservations with about 's business operation , apparently illegal based on their profits . After agreeing to cancel the deal , asks for a new suit . He explains that he needs to be lighter , and faster , in case he runs into any more guard dogs and that he wants to be able to turn his head . That night , dines out with . tells he had to make a reservation weeks earlier , and even then needed to exercised his influence to get a table at the very fashionable restaurant . and his date , the prima ballerina for the Russian ballet , encounter and . has them pull a table together so they can dine together , informing that he owns the restaurant . At first , seems jealous and threatened by , based on the fact that he is dating his own love interest , but explains how he supports the work of and appreciates his help . changes his tune and informs that he intends to throw a massive fund - raiser for him . Meanwhile , all of the top mob members are having a private meeting in a restaurant kitchen . Because of their inside sources in the police , they were aware that the banks that their money was stashed in were going to be searched . appears to them on a television monitor from his plane on his way back to . He informs the mob that all of their money has already been moved to a single secure location , just as and company are searching the banks , finding nothing but the irradiated trace money . When the expresses concern over the man with the clown makeup stealing $ 68 million from one of their banks , dismisses him as nothing but a nobody . The suddenly enters in the room , and after killing a hostile mob member 's crony by way of a ' magic trick ' , sits down and talks with the mob about how pathetic they 've become since came around . He tells them their one solution is to ' Kill the ' , and offers to do so for half the mob 's money . He warns them about , saying he knows a " squealer when he sees one " , prompting to turn off his monitor . The mob laughs , and as one of the mobsters , , rises from his seat and threatens the , the opens his coat , exposing grenades . tells the that he 's putting a price out on his head . The tells the mob that when they plan to take things a little more seriously , give him a call , and presents them with ' his card ' , a joker playing card . And with that , he exits . But not before warning that will come for . , with , lights the batsignal to meet with , who appears . As and blame one another for the money 's disappearance due to leaks from corrupt officers in the other 's departments , they explain to that they need back , realizing that is under no one 's jurisdiction . They want to make him talk , and give up all the mob members ' names . agrees and disappears . shows his new suit , and begins planning an impromptu trip to . will accompany him , making it look like the only reason for his visit was to cancel the negotiations with 's company . is playing pool with some of his associates until one of them informs him that a group of hoodlums have killed the , and has the body . The body is brought in covered in a bag , and as is about to pay , the rises up and holds a knife to his face while his men hold guns to his associates ' heads . The tells a story about how he got his scars from his father , and then kills . He offers the three surviving associates an opportunity to join his team , but he has only one opening . He leave the three with the halves of a broken , sharp pool stick and no choice but to fight each other for their lives . Meanwhile , arrives in to meet with . He checks in his mobile phone at the front desk at 's building , as there are no cell phones allowed on the premises . meets with , and informs him of ' plans to cancel negotiations with his company . However , he secretly keeps one cell phone in his pocket , which has been adapted to produce a sonar map of the surrounding area . Upon leaving the building , he does not pick up the phone he dropped off , and he produces the map of the building to . That night , the phone that left at the front desk emits a high frequency that shuts down all power in the building . crashes in through a window in 's office , and after a vicious fight with some of his guards , grabs and escapes by sending a balloon attached to a cable to a plane he has chartered flying over 's building . Back in , is interrogated by with and looking on . presses him to give them the money has taken , but will not give in . After she threatens to have him moved to the lock - up , tells her that he can give them the names of the mobsters and their pooled investments . then realizes that they will have the leverage they need in a case of conspiracy to link all of the mob members together . decides to keep in his holding cell at the building and agrees to cooperate with the police , and give the names of the mob members . appears at 's restaurant as the police rush in to arrest all of the mob members in attendance . As all of the mob members that informed the police are rounded up for arraignment , finds a card in the middle of the stack of conviction papers . gives a televised impromptu interview denying 's involvement while expressing gratitude for the police work in bringing the mob members to justice . , , and meet with the mayor to tell him that 's rash indictment of the mob members will give the mayor clean streets for 18 months . The mayor informs that his brash actions will bring down the full might of 's underworld and corrupt citizens solely upon him . When the mayor asks if is ready to be the city 's target the dead body of a wanna - be hanging by a noose slams against the mayor 's window dressed up in a suit , with makeup on his face like the 's - complete with the sides of the mouth sliced into a grin - and with a card pinned to him reading ' Will the real please stand up ? ' . and watch on as a video tape is played on the news of the tormenting the wanna - be before killing him . He then promises that until takes off his mask and shows everyone who he really is , people will die every day . As 's fund - raiser at 's penthouse gets underway , and a nervous arrive and mingle . arrives with three models via helicopter and seeks out , whom he applauds and throws his full support behind claiming , " I believe in . " Minutes later , meets with on the balcony upset that is making fun at but tells her that he truly believes in and that he could be the that will allow him to hang up his mantle as so they can be together . joins them to thank and retrieve . Meanwhile discovers that there are 3 traces of DNA on the card , from , , and , the that is trying all of the mob members and found the card among the paperwork . takes this as a threat on their lives , and begins preparations to protect them . In the case of the and , however , this fails . The 's car blows up when the police arrive to take her into protective custody and dies of severe poisoning from his liquor bottle before can stop him from drinking . takes aside to ask her to marry him , but she is torn and can not give him an answer . subdues and locks him in a closet while watches in shock . tells that they ( the and his goons ) have come for and to stay hidden from sight . The and his goons burst in telling the guests that they are tonight 's ' entertainment . " The scans the room seeking out when steps forward . He grabs her and pulls a knife on her telling her a different version of the story about how he got his scars , claiming that his wife was scarred by loan sharks and that he took a razor to himself to " make her smile , " but that she left him over it . kicks him away and he comes after her saying that he likes that " little fight " in her , when shows up and sends him reeling . A fight breaks out between , the , and his goons with the and the goons beating on pretty well . When gains the upper hand he sees the holding a gun at 's head as he dangles her out of a shot out window . demands he let her go , to which the replies " Very poor choice of words " and lets her fall . dives out the window and saves her using his cape to slow their fall as they crash into the roof of a car on the street . The apparently vanishes from the scene . The next day , tries to figure out what the is after . relates a story of when he was in with friends attempting to nullify the local criminals by bribing them with jewels . One thief however , tossed these bribes away and continued to raid the local convoys . When seems confused over this behavior informs him that some men ca n't be reasoned with , they do n't want anything in particular , that they kill for sport . observes that they just want to watch the world burn , as fixates on the 's face on a monitor . is seen on the edge of a rooftop listening in to cell phone frequencies when he overhears a plot against . rushes to the apartment with and to find two policemen murdered , with the last names " " and " . " begins to blame , but cuts her off . As removes a piece of concrete wall that contains a bullet used in the murders in hopes of finding evidence , notes that the has left an advance copy of tomorrow 's newspaper indicating the death of the mayor . At , meets with 's accountant , who claims to know about certain problems with 's funding in research and development , claiming that has some sort of government project with cell phones for the army underway . He also uncovers 's designs for the / . He tells that he wants $ 10 million per year for the rest of his life to keep this a secret . smiles and says , " Let me get this straight . You think that your client , one of the wealthiest and most powerful men in the world is a secretly a vigilante who spends his nights beating criminals to a pulp with his bare hands , and your plan is to blackmail this person ? Good luck . "Fox helps reconstruct the bullet taken from the murder scene and produces a fingerprint . asks him if he has reassigned the department . acknowledges that he has , claiming he is playing this one " close to the chest . "Wayne traces the bullet fingerprint 's owner to an apartment overlooking the funeral speeches for and takes off on motorcycle . As the ceremony continues on the street below , inspects a room where he believes the might be , and he finds several men tied up . They tell that their guns and uniforms were stolen . inspects binoculars pointed out of a blinded window . The window blind is connected to a timer . As the timer reaches zero , the blinds quickly raise , and the police snipers positioned around the area all shoot in that direction . At the same time , the , who had removed his makeup and played himself off as a member of the honor guard for the ceremony , turns and takes a shot at the mayor , but dives in the way , getting shot in the back and falling . Everyone panics and runs , but the police shoot one member of the honor guard in the leg and haul him into a truck . Dent himself climbs in the truck , and upon inspecting the criminal , sees that the name - tag on his uniform reads ' . He calls and informs her that she 's been targeted , and to get to the safest place she can , which in her case is 's penthouse . He tells her he loves her , but there is no answer from . 's family is visited at home , to inform them of the death of at the funeral ceremony . 's wife , , shouts out at the empty sky to that he has brought this craziness upon . 's young son catches a brief glimpse of mournfully watching the scene . Meanwhile , enters a club and grabs after beating on his men . He interrogates on the 's whereabouts , who claims that he should have held him from a higher location . drops him off the ledge , injuring his legs and learns that has no idea where the is . explains that the has no friends and no one will give him up because unlike , he plays by no rules . As is interrogating the captured so - called honor guard member about what he knows about the , he is enraged and holds a gun to his head . He flips his father 's lucky silver dollar for his life , coming up on heads . As he flips the coin again , shows up and snatches the coin in midair , asking if would really leave a thug 's life up to chance , to which answers , " Not exactly . " He informs that this criminal - - is a paranoid schizophrenic patient from and that he wo n't learn anything from him . He also tells that if anyone saw this unjust way of interrogating someone , all that good work that 's done for would be lost . He tells to hold a press conference the following day , because he wants to use that opportunity to turn himself in . As leaves , yells at him that he ca n't give in . arrives back in his penthouse to find waiting . She tells him that turning himself in will not stop the 's murderous rampage , but says he has enough blood on his hands already . He reminds her that she promised him that they would be together if and when he hung up the mantle of . She tells not to make her his only hope for a normal life and they share a kiss . She tells that if he turns himself in as that the city will never let them be together . Back at 's secret base of operations for , he and begin destroying everything that might tie or to . tries to talk out of it , asking him to endure these trying times and allow to make the right choice that nobody else can for the good of the city . explains that can not endure the responsibility for innocents dying , especially where is concerned . At the press conference , attempts to reason with the assembled press and police to not give in to the fear that the has unleashed upon the city . He agrees that is a vigilante but that the people of should hold him accountable , and not give in to the whims of this terrorist known as the . However , the people are overcome with fear , crying out " No more dead cops , " to applause indicating that will not be able to sway them . Upon his failure , announces that HE is the , and gets handcuffed and taken away . is shown with a look of confusion on his face . , watching the news conference at 's penthouse , confronts over 's seeming cowardice in allowing to take the fall when he claims to be . explains to that is instead allowing himself to be something else besides a hero , mainly a figure outside of the system that the people can both turn to or blame in times of need , that can ' take it " . gives a letter for and tells him to give it to when the time is right . When asks what it is , she tells him it is open and hugs him before departing to see as he is being transported to the lock - up . While being taken to a convoy that will transport him to a county , explains to that this is 's chance . He then pulls out the coin and says " Heads : I go through with this , " and flips it , landing on heads . When tells him that he ca n't leave something like that to chance , he tosses her the coin , revealing that it is a two - headed coin . During this transport , he 's planning on getting attacked by the , and he 's planning on to come and save him , and to capture the . The convoy takes off . While transporting , the and some goons start taking out the police cars in a large semi truck . He pulls out an RPG and begins firing at the armored truck carrying . The arrives and attempts to stop the , and is hit by one of the 's RPGs . His car takes ' catastrophic ' damage , and he 's forced to eject . However , the ejection in this car is a bike , the , that deploys out the front of the car . chases down the on his , and after firing some cables at the truck and weaving them through some light poles and buildings , flips the truck completely over . The emerges with a & gun and shoots at , who speeds towards him on his , all the while screaming at to hit him . honors his own non - lethal code and swerves around the then crashes into the flipped truck , falling to the ground . As the jumps on him with a knife , one of the officers holds a shotgun to the back of his head , and upon removing his helmet and mask , shows that it was , who faked his death to protect his family . The is hauled away to the . gets out of the truck and into a cruiser , stating he is off to see a worried girlfriend . At 's building , is promoted to by the . The shares a cell with a large man who complains about his insides hurting . , after reuniting with his family , gets a call explaining that never made it home . He returns to the prison to interrogate the . During the interrogation , appears and starts beating on the , trying to find out where is . The gets under 's skin telling him that they are both freaks and that when the people of no longer view as a necessity , they will turn on him . becomes enraged and puts a chair under the door and beats the savagely , but The just laughs and defiantly tells that there is nothing he can do to him to hurt him and that he actually enjoys the beatings . The sadistically reveals that not just Harvey , but are in separate locations , both tied up and strapped to explosives that will explode in a short amount of time . He gives the locations of the two , saying that he only has time to save one of them and that he must make a choice that will violate 's " code " of non - lethal means ... that one of them will die since can not save them both . heads off , telling that he 's going after . gets some men ready and heads off after . As and the police are rushing towards the two prisoners , awakens to hear 's voice . Whoever captured them set up an intercom system so that the two can communicate . tells that everything will be OK , and tells that she wants to marry him . While tries to move in his chair to find something sharp to cut his ropes with , he falls over and knocks an oil drum down , and gasoline spills all over half of his face . Meanwhile , back at the jail , the tricks a cop and holds him hostage , and he tells the other cops he just wants his phone call . Upon getting a cell phone and dialing a number , the large man that was in the cell with him blows up . The had cut him open and implanted a cell phone - triggered device inside of him . The grabs and flees the jail . arrives at the address that the had told him was at , but when he opens the door , he finds instead , who screams in despair at having been found instead of . arrives at the supposed location for but the warehouse explodes and is killed . As saves by carrying him out of the warehouse , the explosion ignites the gas that saturated 's face , horribly burning it . is taken to . visits in the hospital , and leaves him the two - headed coin that they found at the site where died . One side of the coin is still shiny , while the other side is scraped and burnt . reads 's letter . She explains that she is going to marry and that when she told him that she would be with him when he no longer need to be that she meant it . However , she realizes that he will always be so she will always be there as his friend . expresses to his devastation behind losing and that he feels responsible for inspiring madness and death . he tells that she was going to wait for him . chooses not to give him her letter , saying the time is not right and that with hospitalized , it will be up to him alone to fight the crime in . Meanwhile , wakes up in the hospital with a large bandage over half of his face , finds his now scarred two - headed coin , and screams out in anguish over losing the one person he loved . visits and tries to tell him how sorry he is for what has transpired , questioning why refused skin grafts and painkillers and how he can stand to be in unrelenting agony over his disfigurement . is filled with rage for not listening to him when he warned not to trust the corrupt officers that investigated during his time in which has resulted in 's disfigurement and ultimately 's death . Dent demands tell him the nickname they had for him when he was in , which ashamedly replies " - Face , " while being forced to stare at the extensive burns and scarred tissue that cover half of 's face . As leaves an emotionally devastated , he runs into in the hallway who tells him that the has gone too far and that if wants the clown , he knows where he will be . 's accountant appears on a news show claiming to be able to tell the world who is . He tells that he is going to reveal 's identity , but before he can , the calls in to the show saying that he does n't want this lawyer to ruin his fun . He says that if the lawyer is not killed within 60 minutes , he is going to blow up a hospital . This triggers the police to rush in and protect the lawyer , and try to carry him to safety . At the same time , other police are evacuating all of the hospitals in . When they get to , a police officer attempts to evacuate a nurse in 's room , which then turns out to be the , and he kills the cop . He then explains to Two - Face how he needs to introduce a little anarchy and chaos , how easy it is to bring down all the good people in the world and how it 's all fair . Joker unties Two - Face and hands him a pistol . Two - , bent on revenge and now believing everything in the world should be decided by chance , flips the double - headed coin to decide whether or not to shoot which agrees is only fair . Though we do n't see it , the coin obviously lands on the clean side since the next scene shows leaving as it blows up in the background . Afterwards , the appears on TV again , forcing kidnapped reporter to read out his plans . He reads that now belongs to the , starting that very evening . Anyone that does n't want to be a part of his game should leave now , but they are going to have a hard time leaving the city by the bridges . He alludes to the fact that something big was going to happen that very night . During which , Two - enters a local bar where - the ' dirty ' cop that had picked him up after the was captured - hangs out . After questioning him , he flips the coin which lands on the dirty side and he kills . At the same time , uses 's ' cell phone ' technology to turn every single cell phone in into a sonar device , giving him the opportunity to spy on everyone in . He calls in , and tells him to monitor the screens , and give him updates on the 's location when he sees him . is appalled that would use his technology to spy on the citizens of and reluctantly agrees to help , stating that the machine must be destroyed after the is captured or he will have to retire . tells to enter his name into the console when the mission is over . Two - continues to question mob members , trying to uncover the identity of the dirty cop that kidnapped . When confronting in 's car , he learns that the other cop is . He then flips the coin for , which lands on the clean side . " Lucky man , " he remarks before he flips it again . It lands on the dirty side and he buckles up and states , " But he 's not " as he shoots 's driver , causing the car to veer off the road and crash into the dockyards . Meanwhile , two large ferries leave due to the 's threats . One is inhabited by criminals that and helped put away , the other is packed with innocent citizens - the city 's bridges apparently being wired with explosives . While sailing off , the two boats completely lose all power and their engines die . Both ships eventually realize that there are explosives strewn all about the boat , and they both find detonators . It is at this time that the 's voice is heard over the loudspeaker of both ferries , and he informs them that they are part of a social experiment . The detonator on each boat is for the other boat . One ferry must press the button and destroy the other boat by midnight , or else the will destroy both boats . This brings about much chaos in both boats , and a lot of soul searching about morality and about if anyone could actually do such a thing . finds the , who is holed up in a building still being constructed with many clown guards . notifies of the location , and speeds off towards the building . Meanwhile , Two - Face forces a frightened to call 's family and tell his wife and children to meet her at the exact spot where was killed . They believe her because they trust her . Afterwards , Two - , angered with 's pleas to spare her life for the sake of her sick mother , flips for 's life . The coin lands on heads , so he just knocks her out , telling her that she " lives to fight another day . " As arrives at the building where the is , he gets a call from his family telling him they are being held captive by Two - Face in the place where was killed . rushes off to save his family as breaks in to the building . After realizing that the clown guards are the actual hostages and the doctors / hostages are the 's goons , he beats down some members in order to prevent them from killing the clown guards , and he disables the goons as he makes his way up to the 's location . When he finally confronts the , the sends the 's rottweilers after him , and while fights them off , the beats him brutally with a blunt metal object , and eventually throws him close to the edge of the building , trapping him under a metal beam . At the same time , the two boats are still debating what to do with the detonators . On the ' criminal ferry ' , one of the largest and meanest - looking convicts makes a speech about the warden holding the trigger not knowing how to take life , then goes up to the warden and asks to take the trigger so he himself can do what the warden should have done ten minutes ago . The warden hands the convict the trigger and the convict promptly throws it out of the ferry , making it impossible for anyone on the convict ferry to blow up the ' innocent ' ferry . On the innocent ferry , after having voted to use their detonator , the officials ca n't bring themselves to act out the decision . A man stands up , takes the detonator but is unable to press the button . The , on top of while holding him down , shows signs of disappointment when neither of the ferries ' passengers will stoop to his level . As he 's about to destroy the two boats , fires his gauntlet darts at him , knocking the detonator out of his hands , and throws him over the edge of the building . Before he can hit the ground , however , fires one of his grappling gun tools at him and saves him . While hanging in front of , the tells him that the two of them are destined to fight forever , and how really IS incorruptible . The reveals to him , however , that his real plan was to engineer the fall of 's , , since that would introduce much more chaos when a good man like is shown descending into chaos and evil . heads off to find , while the team captures the . At 250 52nd , arrives to see Two - Face holding his family hostage . Two - knocks him to the ground and tells him that he 's going to make him suffer just as he did , as he grabs his young son and prepares to flip the coin for his fate . arrives and tells him to stop , and to blame the people responsible for 's death . So then Two - flips the coin for , which lands on the dirty , scarred side , and Two - shoots him . He then flips the coin for himself and it lands on the clean side . As he 's flipping the coin for 's son , he tells to lie to the boy and tell him that everything will be alright , just as himself had to tell earlier , seconds before she was killed . gets up and tackles him and they fall off of the building together . Unseen by them , the coin lands on the clean side . hands up to as himself falls to the ground next to Two - Face , who lies motionless . As climbs down to check on , laments that , in the end , the won . By corrupting and turning him evil , he tore down the best of them . If were to find out about 's murders , then the symbol of hope and faith he had given would diminish and all the prisoners he helped put back in jail would be let out , thus creating chaos . explains that can never find out about the murders , and takes the blame of them on himself , so that the would n't win and the city 's peace would remain . We see a montage of and other members of the gathered at a memorial to . It is unclear whether he was killed or not . then smashes the above the , while burns 's note and shuts down the sonar machine with a pleased look . , in the background , continues to explain that by taking the blame of the killings , the faith that the people of had in can be rewarded , and they can feel justified . then runs from as the cops begin to chase him , and tells his son that while was the hero needed , is the hero that deserved . The bat - signal is destroyed and a manhunt is issued for . gets on his and speeds away , while 's a silent . A watchful protector . A . "</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The presents two parallel storylines . One involves chief in 1958/1959 after the events of the first movie ; the other is a series of flashbacks following his father , from 1917 to 1925 , from his youth in ( 1901 ) to the founding of the family in . The film begins in 1901 , in the town of , , at the funeral of young 's father , , who has been murdered for an insult to the local , . During the procession , 's older brother is murdered because he swore revenge on the . 's mother goes to to beg for mercy , but he refuses , knowing that nine - year - old will seek revenge later in life . The mother takes hostage at knifepoint , allowing her son to escape , and 's men kill her . They search the town for the boy , but he is aided in his escape by the townspeople . finds his way by ship to , and at an immigration agent chooses 's hometown of as his surname , and he is registered as " Corleone" . In 1958 in a scene similar to the opening of the first film , ( ) , of the family , deals with various business and family problems during an elaborate party at his , compound to celebrate his son 's . In his office , meets with corrupt ( ) to discuss the price of the gaming licenses for the hotel / casinos the is buying . , who has obvious contempt for and other Italian businessmen who are moving into his state to take advantage of gambling opportunities , promises to make 's acquisition of his gaming license a difficult process . ends his conversation with when he refuses to pay the outrageous fee demands , telling the senator he 'll get nothing . also deals with his self - indulgent younger sister ( ) , who , although recently divorced from her second husband , is planning to marry a man named ( ) with no obvious means of support and of whom disapproves . is still resentful of her brother having her husband , , killed years before due to his betrayal of the family . also talks with ( ) , the right hand man of Jewish gangster ( ) , who is supporting 's move into the gambling industry . Belatedly , deals with " " ( ) , a business associate who took over caporegime 's territory in after his death , and now has problems with the , who are backed by . Pentangeli leaves abruptly , after telling " your father did business with , your father respected , but your father never trusted . "Later that night , barely escapes an assassination attempt when his wife ( ) notices the bedroom window drapes are inexplicably open , which allows two unseen hitmen to spray the bedroom with bullets . The two hitman are found dead having been killed by a " mole " within the compound . Afterwards , tells his lawyer and associate ( ) that the hit was made with the help of someone close , and that he must leave , entrusting all his power to to protect his family . Flashback : In 1917 , the adult ( ) works in a grocery store in the side with his friend . The neighborhood is controlled by a member of the " The , " ( ) , who extorts protection payments from local businesses . One night , 's neighbor ( ) asks him to hide a stash of guns for him , and later , to repay the favor , takes him to a fancy apartment where they commit their first felony together , stealing an elegant rug . The film flash - forwards to 's time . meets with in , who tells that he believes was responsible for the assassination attempt , and that will pay for it . Traveling to , lets know that was actually behind it , and that has a plan to deal with , but he needs to cooperate with the in order to put off guard . While sleeping , gets a phone call in the middle of the night from , 's right hand man , revealing that is the traitor in the family . conspires with , telling him that is going to make peace with the . asks information about the meeting between these two parties , and whether or not will be alone . disagrees to cooperate and tells to never call him again . When goes to meet with the at a local bar , he is told " says hello , " as he is attacked from behind but the attempted murder is accidentally interrupted by a policeman . is left for dead , and his bodyguard , ( ) , is struck by a car while shooting at the as they drive away . Back in , is called to a brothel in run by 's older brother ( ) , where is implicated in the death of a prostitute , and offers to take care of the problem in return for " friendship " between the and the family . Meanwhile , meets in , , in late 1958 , at the time when dictator is soliciting American investment , and communist guerrillas are trying to bring down the government . At a birthday party for , mentions that there is a possibility that the rebels might win , making their business dealings in problematic . Earlier that day , had witnessed a communist rebel kill a policemen by detonating a grenade that also killed the rebel himself . The comment prompts to remark , privately , that has not delivered the two million dollars to firm their partnership . , carrying the promised money , arrives in and meets . mentions and to him , but says he has never met them . confides to his brother that it was who tried to kill him , and that he plans to try again . assures that he has already made his move , and that " will never see the . "Instead of turning over the money to , asks him who gave the order to have killed . avoids the question , instead speaking angrily of the murder of his old friend , , which had orchestrated ( as depicted at the end of the first has asked , who knows well , to show and other important officials and businessmen a good time , during which pretends to not recognize . Soon after , at a sex show , comments loudly that told him about the place , contradicting what he told twice earlier , that he did n't know or . now realizes that the traitor is his own brother , and dispatches his bodyguard to deal with . is strangled , but , in a delicate state because of his heart condition , is taken to a hospital , where 's enforcer is shot trying to kill him . At 's 's party , at the stroke of midnight , grasps tightly by the head and kisses him : " I know it was you ; you broke my heart . " When guerrillas attack , the guests flee , but refuses to go with , despite 's pleas that is still his brother and that it 's the only way out . ( 1917 ): of the is now aware of the partnership between , and ( ) , and wants his share of their profits every week . and agree to pay , but is reluctant and asks his friends to leave everything in his hands so will accept less and indeed , manages to get to take only one sixth of what he demanded ( $ 100 out of $ 600 ) . Immediately afterward , during the neighborhood festa , murders in the hallway outside his apartment and then rejoins his wife and three children on the stoops outside his tenement . tells the infant that his father loves him very much . In 1959 , , returns to his snow - covered compound after fleeing , where tells him that escaped from after suffering a stroke and is recovering in , that 's bodyguard is dead , and that is probably hiding in . Hagen also informs that had a miscarriage while he was away . is distraught at the news and furiously demands to know the sex of the child , but is unable to tell him . ( 1920 ): with dead and with no one else to take over the , earns the respect of the neighborhood and begins to intercede in local disputes , operating out of the storefront of his ( named after his friend ) which he manages as well as give out " favors " to others in the community such as a local young woman threatened with eviction . intimidates her landlord into letting her stay for a few extra weeks ... rent free . In , of 1959 , a committee , of which is a member , is conducting an investigation into the family . They question disaffected " soldier " about his role as a button man in the , but he can not implicate , because he never received any direct orders from him . When appears before the committee , makes a big show of supporting - and then excuses himself from the proceedings . During questioning , denies all criminal allegations against him , from the murder of and back in 1946 ( in the first movie ) , and to his business status of operating several gambling casinos in . makes a statement challenging the committee to produce a witness to corroborate the charges against him . The hearing ends with the promising a witness who will do exactly that . , who survived the attack by the , has made a deal with the , and will testify against . and discuss the problem , observing that 's strategy to destroy is well planned . 's brother has been found and persuaded to return to , and in a private meeting he explains to his betrayal : upset about being passed over to head the family in favor of , he wants respect and his due . He helped thinking there would be something in it for him , but he swears he did n't know they wanted to kill . He also tells that the 's chief counsel is 's man . then tells : " You 're nothing to me now . Not a brother , not a friend , nothing " , and privately instructs soldier and button man ( ) that nothing is to happen to while their mother is still alive . At the hearing in which is to testify , arrives accompanied by 's brother , brought from , and whose presence causes to recant his previous statements about . When is pressed , he claims that he just told the what they wanted to hear . With no witness to testify against , the committee adjourns , with , acting as 's lawyer , loudly demanding an apology . At a hotel room afterwards , tries to leave , taking their children with her . at first tries to mollify her , but loses his temper and hits her violently when she reveals to him that her recent " miscarriage " was actually an abortion to avoid providing another child into 's criminal inheritance . She also tells him that the baby was a boy , further infuriating . ( 1925 ): While visiting for a family vacation for the first time in over 20 years , is introduced to the elderly 90 - year - old as the man who imports their olive oil to , and who wants his blessing . When asks who his father was , says , " My father 's name is , and this is for you ! " , cutting the old man 's stomach open with a knife , avenging the death of his father , mother , and brother . As they make their escape from 's compound and his men , is shot in the leg by one of 's bodyguards , giving him a permanent limp . In 1959 , ( ) , 's widow and the mother of his children , dies , and the whole family is reunited for her funeral . still shuns , who is miserable , but relents when implores him to . and embrace , but at the same time signals to his capo that 's protection from harm , in effect while their mother lived , has now run out . , , and discuss their final dealings with , who has been unsuccessfully seeking asylum from various countries , and was even refused entry to as a returned . rejects 's advice that the family 's position is secure , and killing and the brothers for revenge is an unnecessary risk . Later , pays a visit to the imprisoned on a military base and suggests that he take his own life , in the manner of unsuccessful ancient Roman conspirators who , in return , were promised that their families would be taken care of after their suicide . With the connivance of , visits her children , but can not bear to leave them and stays too long . When arrives , he coldly closes the door in her face . The movie reaches its climax in a montage of assassinations and death , reminiscent of the end of One : As he arrives at an airport to be taken into custody , is killed by , disguised as a journalist , who himself is immediately shot dead by 's bodyguards . On the military base , is found dead , having followed 's instructions and committed suicide in his bathtub . is murdered by while they are fishing on - while is saying a to help catch a fish . The penultimate scene takes place late in 1941 , and the family is preparing a surprise birthday party for their father . ( ) introduces ( ) , 's future husband and betrayer of , to his family . They all talk about the recent attack on by the , and shocks everybody by announcing that he has just enlisted in the . Sonny ridicules 's choice , and mentions how his father has great expectations for . is the only one who supports his brother 's decision . comes in with the cake for the party , and when arrives , all but leave the room to greet him . The final shot in the film is sitting by himself at , in silent contemplation.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > In a courthouse , an eighteen - year - old boy from a slum is on trial for allegedly stabbing his father to death . Final closing arguments having been presented , a visibly bored judge instructs the jury to decide whether the boy is guilty of murder . If there is any reasonable doubt of his guilt they are to return a verdict of not guilty . The judge further informs them that a guilty verdict will be accompanied by a mandatory death sentence . The jury retires to a private room , where the jurors spend a short while getting acquainted before they begin deliberating . It is immediately apparent that the jurors have already decided that the boy is guilty , and that they plan to return their verdict without taking time for discussion with the sole exception of 8 ( ) , who is the only " not guilty " vote in a preliminary tally . He explains that there is too much at stake for him to go along with the verdict without at least talking about it first . His vote annoys the other jurors , especially 7 ( ) , who has tickets to a baseball game that evening ; and 10 ( ) , who believes that people from backgrounds are liars , wild , and dangerous . The rest of the film 's focus is the jury 's difficulty in reaching a unanimous verdict . While several of the jurors harbor personal prejudices , 8 maintains that the evidence presented in the case is circumstantial , and that the boy deserves a fair deliberation . He calls into question the accuracy and reliability of the only two witnesses to the murder , the " rarity " of the murder weapon ( a common switchblade , of which he has an identical copy ) , and the overall questionable circumstances . He further argues that he can not in good conscience vote " guilty " when he feels there is reasonable doubt of the boy 's guilt . Having argued several points and gotten no favorable response from the others , 8 reluctantly agrees that he has only succeeded in hanging the jury . Instead , he requests another vote , this time by secret ballot . He proposes that he will abstain from voting , and if the other 11 jurors are still unanimous in a guilty vote , then he will acquiesce to their decision . The secret ballot is held , and a new " not guilty " vote appears . This earns intense criticism from 3 ( ) , who blatantly accuses 5 ( ) who had grown up in a slum of switching out of sympathy toward slum children . However , 9 ( ) reveals that he himself changed his vote , feeling that 8 's points deserve further discussion . Juror 8 presents a convincing argument that one of the witnesses , an elderly man who claimed to have heard the boy yell " I 'm going to kill you " shortly before the murder took place , could not have heard the voices as clearly as he had testified due to an elevated train passing by at the time ; as well as stating that " I 'm going to kill you , " is often said by people who do not literally mean it . Juror 5 changes his vote to " not guilty " . Soon afterward , 11 ( ) questions whether it is reasonable to suppose the defendant would have fled the scene , having cleaned the knife of fingerprints but leaving it behind , and then come back three hours later to retrieve it ( having been left in his father 's chest ) . Juror 11 then changes his vote . Juror 8 then mentions the man 's second claim : upon hearing the father 's body hit the floor , he had run to the door of his apartment and seen the defendant running out of the building from his front door in 15 seconds . 5 , 6 and 8 question whether this is true , as the witness in question had had a stroke , limiting his ability to walk . Upon the end of an experiment , the jury finds that the witness would not have made it to the door in enough time to actually see the killer running out . Juror 8 concludes that , judging from what he claims to have heard earlier , the witness must have merely assumed it was the defendant running . Juror 3 , growing more irritated throughout the process , explodes in a rant : " He 's got to burn ! He 's slipping through our fingers ! " Juror 8 takes him to task , calling him a " self - appointed public avenger " and a sadist , saying he wants the defendant to die because of personal desire rather than the facts . Juror 3 shouts " I 'll kill him ! " and starts lunging at 8 , but is restrained by 5 and 7 . Juror 8 calmly retorts , " You do n't really mean you 'll kill me , do you ? " , proving his previous point . 2 ( ) and 6 ( ) also decide to vote " not guilty " , tying the vote at 6 - 6 . Soon after , a rainstorm hits the city , apparently postponing the baseball game for which 7 has tickets , thus allowing him to relax and pay attention with that schedule pressure relieved . Juror 4 ( ) continues to state that he does not believe the boy 's alibi , which was being at the movies with a few friends at the time of the murder , because the boy could not remember what movie he had seen when questioned by police shortly after the murder . Juror 8 explains that being under emotional stress can make you forget certain things , and tests how well Juror 4 can remember the events of previous days . Juror 4 remembers , with some difficulty , the events of the previous five days , and Juror 8 points out that he had not been under emotional stress at that time , thus there was no reason to think the boy should be able to remember the particulars of the movie that he claimed to have seen . Juror 2 calls into question the prosecution 's claim that the accused , who was " tall , was able to inflict the downward wound found on his father , who was 6'2 " . Jurors 3 and 8 conduct an experiment to see if it 's possible for a shorter person to stab downward into a taller person . The experiment proves the possibility , but 5 then explains that he had grown up amidst knife fights in his neighborhood , and shows , through demonstrating the correct use of a switchblade , that no one so much shorter than his opponent would have held a switchblade in such a way as to stab downward , as the grip would have been too awkward and the act of changing hands too time - consuming . Rather , someone that much shorter than his opponent would stab underhanded at an upwards angle . This revelation augments the certainty of several of the jurors in their belief that the defendant is not guilty . Increasingly impatient , 7 changes his vote just so that the deliberation may end , which earns him the ire of 3 and 11 , both on opposite sides of the discussion . Juror 11 , an immigrant who has repeatedly displayed strong patriotic pride , presses 7 hard about using his vote frivolously , and eventually 7 admits that he now truly believes the defendant is not guilty . The next jurors to change their votes are 12 ( ) and the ( ) , making the vote 9 - 3 and leaving only three dissenters : 3 , 4 and 10 . Outraged at how the proceedings have gone , 10 goes into a rage on why people from the slums can not be trusted , of how they are little better than animals who gleefully kill each other off for fun . His speech offends 5 , who turns his back to him , and one by one the rest of the jurors start turning away from him . Confused and disturbed by this reaction to his diatribe , 10 continues in a steadily fading voice and manner , slowing to a stop with " Listen to me . Listen ... " Juror 4 , the only man still facing him , tersely responds , " I have . Now sit down and do n't open your mouth again . " As 10 moves to sit in a corner by himself , 8 speaks quietly about the evils of prejudice , and the other jurors slowly resume their seats . When those remaining in favor of a guilty vote are pressed as to why they still maintain that there is no reasonable doubt , 4 states his belief that despite all the other evidence that has been called into question , the fact remains that the woman who saw the murder from her bedroom window across the street ( through the passing train ) still stands as solid evidence . After he points this out , 12 changes his vote back to " guilty " , making the vote 8 - 4.Then 9 , after seeing 4 rub his nose ( which is being irritated by his eye glasses ) , realizes that , like 4 , the woman who allegedly saw the murder had impressions in the sides of her nose which she rubbed , indicating that she wore glasses , but did not wear them to court out of vanity . Juror 8 cannily asks 4 if he wears his eyeglasses to sleep , and 4 admits that he does not wear them nobody does . Juror 8 explains that there was thus no logical reason to expect that the witness happened to be wearing her glasses while trying to sleep , and he points out that on her own evidence the attack happened so swiftly that she would not have had time to put them on . After he points this out , 12 , 10 and 4 all change their vote to " not guilty" . At this point , the only remaining juror with a guilty vote is 3 . Juror 3 gives a long and increasingly tortured string of arguments , ending with , " kids , you work your life out ! " This builds on a more emotionally ambivalent earlier revelation that his relationship with his own son is deeply strained , and his anger over this fact is the main reason that he wants the defendant to be guilty . Juror 3 finally loses his temper and tears up a photo of himself and his son , then suddenly breaks down crying and changes his vote to " not guilty " , making the vote unanimous . As the jurors leave the room , 8 helps the distraught 3 with his coat in a show of compassion . The film ends when the friendly 8 ( ) and 9 ( ) exchange names , and all of the jurors descend the courthouse steps to return to their individual lives ... never to see each other again.(Note : there is no indication nor is the question ever answered if the teenage boy really is guilty or not ; instead the film makes it clear that this is outside of the question if the jurors can not be certain that he is guilty , if there is any reasonable doubt , they must acquit him.)</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The relocation of Polish from surrounding areas to begins in late 1939 , shortly after the outbreak of , when the defeats the in three weeks . ( ) , a successful businessman , arrives from in hopes of using the abundant cheap labour force of to manufacture enamelware for the German military . , an opportunistic member of the party , lavishes bribes upon the army and officials in charge of procurement . Sponsored by the military , acquires a factory for the production of army mess kits and cooking paraphernalia . Not knowing much about how to properly run such an enterprise , he gains a contact in ( ) , a functionary in the local ( Jewish ) who has contacts with the now - underground Jewish business community in the ghetto . They loan him the money for the factory in return for a small share of products produced ( for trade on the black market ) . Opening the factory , pleases the and enjoys his new - found wealth and status as " , " while handles all administration . suggests hire instead of because they cost less ( the themselves get nothing ; the wages are paid to the ) . Workers in 's factory are allowed outside the ghetto , and Stern falsifies documents to ensure that as many people as possible are deemed " essential " by the bureaucracy , which saves them from being transported to concentration camps , or even being killed . ( ) arrives in to initiate construction of a labor camp nearby , . The soon liquidates the ghetto , sending in hundreds of troops to empty the cramped rooms and shoot anyone who protests , is uncooperative , elderly , or infirmed , or for no reason at all . watches the massacre from the hills overlooking the area , and is profoundly affected . He nevertheless is careful to befriend and , through 's attention to bribery , he continues to enjoy the 's support and protection . The camp is built outside the city at . During this time , bribes into allowing him to build a sub - camp for his workers , with the motive of keeping them safe from the depredations of the guards . Eventually , an order arrives from commanding to exhume and destroy all bodies of those killed in the ghetto , dismantle , and to ship the remaining to . prevails upon to let him keep " his " workers so that he can move them to a factory in his old home of - , in -- away from the " final solution " now fully under way in occupied . acquiesces , charging a certain amount for each worker . and assemble a list of workers that should keep them off the trains to . 's List " comprises these " skilled " inmates , and for many of those in , being included means the difference between life and death . also plays a game of high card draw for one worker in particular , , who 'd been serving as 's housekeeper and had been a victim of his continual abuse . is reluctant , hoping to run away with her but knowing that such an action would result in his death as well as hers . He also floats the idea of simply executing her but finally decides to play for 's life . is among those who board the train to . All of the men on 's list arrive safely at the new site , with the exception to the train carrying the women and the children , which is accidentally redirected to . There , the women are directed to what they believe is a gas chamber ; after a harrowing experience where their hair is crudely cut off and they are forced to strip , they see only water falling from the showers . The day after , the women are shown waiting in line for work . In the meantime , had rushed immediately to to solve the problem and to get the women out of ; to this end he bribes the camp commander , ( - ) , with a cache of diamonds so that he is able to spare all the women and the children . However , a last problem arises just when all the women are boarding the train because several officers attempt to hold some children back and prevent them from leaving . , there to personally oversee the boarding , steps in and is successful in obtaining from the officers the release of the children . Once the women arrive in - , institutes firm controls on the guards assigned to the factory ; summary executions are forbidden , abuse of the workers is as well and the Nazi guards are not allowed on the factory floor . also permits the to observe the , and spends much of his fortune acquired in bribing officials . In his home town , he surprises his wife while she 's in church during mass , and tells her that she is the only woman in his life ( despite having been shown previously to be a womanizer ) . She goes with him to the factory to assist him . He runs out of money just as the German army surrenders , ending the war in . As a German and self - described " profiteer of slave labor , " must flee the oncoming . After dismissing the guards to return to their families , he packs a car in the night , and bids farewell to his workers . They give him a letter explaining he is not a criminal to them , together with a ring engraved with the Talmudic quotation , " He who saves the life of one man , saves the world entire . " is touched but deeply distraught , feeling he could 've done more to save many more lives . He leaves with his wife during the night , dressed in Polish prisoner clothes , posing as refugees . The , having slept outside the factory gates through the night , are awakened by sunlight the next morning . A Soviet dragoon arrives and announces to the that they have been liberated by the . The walk to a nearby town in search of food . A title card informs us that was declared a " righteous person " by the of , and himself planted a tree on the of the in , which still grows to this day . The fate of is also shown ; he was captured near the German town of and taken back to where , defiant to the end and announcing his allegiance to , is hanged for crimes against humanity . As the surviving walk abreast , the frame changes to another of the in the present day ( in color ) at the grave of in . The film ends with a procession of now - aged who worked in 's factory , each of whom reverently sets a stone on his grave . The actors portraying the major characters walk hand - in - hand with the people they portrayed , also placing stones on 's grave as they pass . Actor escorts the late 's wife and escorts 's wife in her wheelchair . The audience learns that the survivors and descendants of the approximately 1,100 sheltered by now number over 6,000 . The Jewish population of , once numbering in the millions , was at the time of the film 's release approximately 4,000 . In the final scene , a man ( himself , though his face is not visible ) places a pair of roses on the grave , and stands contemplatively over it.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > In the opening scene : a flashback shows two hobbits , ( ) and his friend ( ) , are fishing the near the in the of . is dragged into the river by a powerful catch and discovers the glinting in the river bed . He collects it and climbs out of the water . sees him fondling it and as they both succumb to the 's power they begin to quarrel . Smagol demands the , saying that it 's his birthday and it should be his present . The squabble turns into a fight ; strangles his friend with his bare hands and pries the from 's clenched fist . is ostracized from his community and driven away . Suffering terribly from loneliness and shame , takes solace in his love for the , which slowly tortures his mind . He takes solitary refuge in caves beneath the mountains , where under the influence of the he lives to a very great age . He dwindles into a hunched , furtive , slinking creature known by the unpleasant noise he makes in his throat -- " . "In the present , on the outskirts of , ( ) and ( ) are resting in an alcove . Sam awakes and sees that his master has not slept . The days are growing darker the closer they get to and . arrives and urges them to move on . Away in the west , ( ) , ( ) , ( - ) , ( ) , ( ) , and ( ) ride through the forest of to , where they meet ( ) and ( ) feasting among the wreckage . They find at the tower of in the center of , where ( ) has been trapped . Gandalf opposes 's call to kill , saying that the wizard has no power anymore and will pose no further threat . Saruman shows himself to them . Gandalf shatters 's staff , robbing him of his power . ( ) , who is still with him , stabs him with a knife . shoots with an arrow , but falls to his death , landing on the spikes of a large waterwheel . As they are talking , sees 's palantr amongst the flotsam and is entranced by it , but quickly takes it from him and hides in under his cloak . The group rides to , where has prepared a large banquet to ' hail the victorious dead ' of the of the . There ( ) shows affection for Aragorn which Thoden notices ; he tells her that he is happy for her , Aragorn being an honorable man and the architect of the victory at 's . Gandalf expresses to Aragorn his concerns over the quest . Aragorn tells him to trust in what his heart tells him , that is still alive . awakes in the night as and are sleeping and goes off to one side to murmur to himself . His evil half senses some doubt in and insists that if he can murder once ( like he murdered for the ring ) he can do it again . then begins leading through their plan , to deliver the hobbits into the clutches of in , after which the Ring can be reclaimed . hears the conversation and beats for his treachery . Frodo intervenes , saying that as their guide is necessary for their quest . Sam glowers as flashes him an evil smile while 's back is turned . That same night back in , 's curiosity gets the better of him ; relieving a sleeping Gandalf of the palantr , he looks into it . sees a vision of a white tree in a stone courtyard set ablaze , but in doing so he is caught by and submitted to mental torture and questioning . Aragorn tries to rescue him , briefly exposing himself to . recovers from his ordeal and it is discovered that he did not tell anything of the 's whereabouts . From 's vision of the , Gandalf deduces that is now moving to attack the great Gondorian city of and he rides off to send warning , taking with him , lest his urge to look into the palantr ( left now in 's keeping ) return again . Leaving on her way to the , ( ) has a vision of ( ) , the son she will have with . She realises that her father lied to her when he said she and had no future together . She returns to Rivendell and convinces ( ) that having forsaken the life of the , she can not leave now . She tells her father that as foretold , the time to reforge has come . , the sword of , is the birthright of the true heir of , the man who used the sword to cut the from 's hand . Gandalf and arrive at , of Kings , that was built out of the rock of . There recognises the as they go to find the ( ) . They approach him as he mourns over ( ) , his son . Pippin swears loyalty to him in recompense for 's sacrifice . Denethor seems to be caught up in his grief and has not taken measures to fortify the city against the threat of . Meanwhile , , , and arrive at . of the enemy , they locate the ( leading to the pass of ) that lies hidden in the cliffs surrounding the accursed city . Just at that moment , the doors of the city open and the - king of , leader of the , dispatches his immense army from his lair , heralding the start of the war . The outpouring of the army is witnessed by and as a flash of lightning shoots up at the opening of the doors . At the urging of Gandalf , lights the first of the beacon signals to , alerting , and the rest of the to muster at and thence to . As they leave , notices that saddles up with them and that she is girt with a sword , but she insists that she rides only to see them off and that the men have found their captain in . The army crosses at in makeshift boats and engages the Gondorian contingent ( lead by 's brother ( ) ) in battle . The orcs prove too strong and drive the out of ; and his few surviving men retreat to , pursued by the . Gandalf , riding out to meet the retreating men , wards them off , saving . Upon his arrival , ( who met , , and in just before they headed for the mountain pass into ) tells of the dangerous route is taking and on , convincing of 's treachery . The hobbits , lead by , are struggling to climb the extremely steep stairs . reaches out and empathises with , saying that he understands his pain . also poisons against , saying that will try and take the Ring from . In the captured , the - king orders his captain to " send forth all legions " and annihilate the population of , saying that he himself will " break " the . Denethor , ill - pleased by 's failed defence of , manipulates him into taking a doomed ride to reclaim the city . continues to play the hobbits against each other , this time by blaming for eating their food provisions . , in his deluded state , is suspicious of and orders him back home when , trying to be helpful , offers to carry the , thereby fulfilling 's cunning prediction . Faramir rides head - long into the arrows of the encamped orcs as sings for Denethor who unconcernedly eats his noon meal . 's attack fails and is dragged back by his horse in a death - like coma . At the weapon - take at , a hooded figure slowly rides on a white horse along the winding road to the encampment in the hills . The figure reveals himself to as . He presents with his birthright -- the newly reforged sword , now named , of the . He urges to use this sword to recall the of and use their allegiance to the heir of ( i.e. ) to stop the attack of the ' ships , which are already sailing from the south . Aragorn accepts this counsel and rides off that very night into the , along with and . As he is preparing to go , a tearful comes to Aragorn and begs him not to go , declaring her love for him , but , knowing now that has refused the promise of , likewise refuses 's love . The next morning , rides off to war with six thousand riders , unaware that and , who were both told to remain behind by the , are part of his army . The forces , composed mostly of , begin the siege of by catapulting the heads of captured prisoners over the walls . Denethor sees his son and believes him to be dead ; he also beholds the might of the forces marshaled against him and at this he loses hope and his mind , ordering the to abandon their positions . Gandalf , however , steps in and incapacitates , assuming control of the defence . A skirmish between Gondorian trebuchets and 's catapults ensues until the - king and the other on their Beasts attack , destroying the trebuchets and sewing terror among the defenders . Away in , betrays to the giant spider - creature , but returns to fight her off . believes is dead , but when from the of come and investigate , overhears that has only been paralysed by 's stinger . In , , stricken mad with grief at having spent both his sons , prepares a funeral pyre for himself and the unconscious . Denethor is unaware that is not dead and the pyre will burn him alive . Gandalf and arrive in the and manage to save , but Denethor is thrown onto the pyre and as he burns to death , he turns and sees his son stirring awake from his injuries and exhaustion . Down in the city , the battle goes ill with the , as the huge battering ram shatters the gates of the city and trolls pour in . As the defenders retreat to the upper levels of the city , the orcs crawl through the streets of the lower levels , looting , burning and massacring the men of . But suddenly in the midst of the chaos a lone horn penetrates the air and all turn to the west and see the army of arrive at last , to the rising of the sun . The charge into the with great effect . However their joy is cut short by the arrival of the forces of and the immense elephants , the . The - king descends on , killing his horse and fatally wounding the King . Seemingly in the nick of time , the ' ships arrive to help the stranded , but it is Aragorn who jumps off the lead ship , followed by an army of the dead . They completely destroy the and , while and kill the - king . Thoden dies of his wounds and holds the 's oath fulfilled , releasing them from their curse so that they may rest in peace . rescues from , which is mostly empty following a fight between the two factions of the 's garrison over 's valuable mithril shirt . They begin the long trek across to . realizes that ten thousand stand between and , which will prevent from reaching his destination . Aragorn proposes they lead the remaining soldiers to the to draw the away from 's path , as well as distract the of . carries up to , but arrives and attacks them , just as the of the begins . At the of , , instead of dropping the Ring into the fire , succumbs to its power and puts it on , disappearing from sight . The act alerts , who sends the racing towards . renders unconscious then attacks , seizing his ring finger and biting it off . As rejoices at finally having reclaimed his Precious , , still under the sway of the 's attraction , charges at . After a brief struggle , they both fall over the edge of the precipice . falls into the fire with the , while barely hangs on with his strength failing . Sam rescues as the finally sinks into the lava and is destroyed . 's screams as his essence fades before the tower of - dr collapses and then explodes , forever banishing his power . The , and the remaining forces of are consumed in the ensuing shockwave as the earth collapses under their feet ; the and are both shaken apart . and become stranded when the entire top of is blown off in a large eruption . They voice their regrets at not being able to see the Shire again amidst the torrents of lava and the destruction of - . With the destruction of the , is able to call upon the to carry the hobbits to safety . They awake in , reuniting with the other members of the fellowship , all of them but having survived the of the . In , is crowned of the , heralding the new age of peace , and marries . Here is when everybody kneels down in homage to the little hobbits . The hobbits return to the Shire , where marries ( ) . , having finished writing his entry in the of , is still suffering from the effects of the wounds he received from the at and from . Realising that he will never have peace in - , he decides to go with , , and to the and sail to , ( the ) . Before embarking at the havens , passes the to to record the years of his life to come . Then the last ship to leave - sets off , pulling slowly away from the shore and passing along the into the . and take their leave and is left staring into the golden sunset . In the last scene , walks back up the lane to , where he is greeted by his wife , and his children . Surrounded by his family and with the rest of his life ahead of him , sighs and says " Well , I 'm back . " He goes inside and shuts the door as the screen fades to black.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > Late one morning in the , a restaurant on in , a young couple , ( ) and ( ) , discuss the pros and cons of robbing banks versus liquor stores . Then they add restaurants to the equation , realizing they can make more by taking customers ' wallets than they get out of the till . The two kiss , declare they love each other and stand up in their booth , announcing that they 're robbing the diner . Earlier in the day , ( ) and ( ) arrive at a apartment building . They are hit men in the employ of and have come to retrieve a valuable belonging of 's from a group of would - be crooks led by a young and naive guy named ( ) . They take back the valuable item -- kept in a briefcase , it glows warmly and transfixes whoever looks at it . Jules recites what he claims is a verse , 25:17 , before he and execute . Story # 1 : And 's WifeAt his strip club , ( ) pays boxer ( ) to throw his next fight . and arrive ; though it 's only a few hours after their visit to the , the two hit men are sporting gym clothes in place of the suits they wore earlier in the day . While heads to the men 's room , goes to the bar and encounters . The men take an instant disliking to each other . insults but before can retaliate , calls over and embraces him . is leaving town that evening and is to take ' wife , ( ) , out for dinner to keep her entertained . Rumors abound that gravely wounded another associate , , who he believed had been improperly friendly with , so is nervous . Before picking up , he visits his drug dealer , ( ) , and buys some high - quality heroin . Properly sedated , he escorts the cocaine - addicted , chain - smoking to 's , a 1950s - themed restaurant . After some small talk about European travel , 's failed acting career , foot massage , and the rumors about ( which dispels ) , enters herself and in a dance contest . They dance The and win a trophy . After dinner , they return to the 's home . goes to the bathroom to talk himself out of making a pass at . Meanwhile , she discovers the baggie of heroin in his coat pocket and , assuming it 's cocaine , snorts some . She immediately passes out and begins to foam at the mouth . Panicked , takes the dying to 's where they argue about what to do with her . Following 's advice , is able to revive her with a shot of adrenaline administered straight to the heart . takes home . They agree not to tell what happened since both of them would get in trouble for it . Story # 2 : The following night , before his fight , dreams of an incident from his childhood : Back at his home in 1973 , ( ) visited to bring him a gold watch . The watch had belonged to 's great - grandfather , who took it to I with him . 's grandfather had taken it to , and 's father to . 's father died as a POW , but gave the watch to Koons to return to . Koons says that he and 's father had to hide the watch in their rectums to keep it away from their captors . Butch reaches up with his hand and takes the watch from Koons . Butch wakes from the dream . Instead of throwing the match ( offscreen ) , he fights so viciously that he kills his opponent . He took ' money and bet it on himself ; his winnings will amount to a small fortune . makes small talk with ( ) , the driver of the cab he is in , who reveals that she knows he 's the boxer who killed his opponent ; she seems fascinated with the topic of death . Esmarelda drives to the seedy motel where he and his French girlfriend , ( ) , are staying , having abandoned their apartment . In the morning they will travel to 's hometown of , , claim their winnings , and leave the country . While packing the next morning , however , reveals that she forgot the gold watch , the belonging cherishes above all others . After a savage outburst in which he wrecks the motel room 's television , takes 's car to get the watch , parking a few blocks away and walking through a vacant lot to his apartment building as a precaution . He enters without incident and finds his wristwatch in the bedroom . He realizes he 's not alone in the apartment when he notices a sub - machine gun in the kitchen . off guard as he emerges from the bathroom , kills him with the gun he found . He leaves his apartment after wiping the gun down with a tissue to remove his fingerprints . Leaving the apartment with his watch , encounters crossing the street . He tries to run over with his car but only wounds him and is hit by another car himself . Both are injured and chases into a pawn shop . There , the owner , ( ) , overpowers them . and wake up in the basement of the pawn shop , bound and gagged . has called his cousin ( ) , who works as a security guard . and are apparently a pair of redneck serial killers who kill passersby who happen into their store . While the ( ) , a huge man - child dressed head to toe in black leather fetish gear , watches , and take into the next room and begin to rape him . Butch manages to break the ropes and chair holding him and knocks out the . Ready to leave the pawn shop and to his fate , has an attack of conscience and procures a samurai sword and rescues ; in the process , is killed and emasculated by a shotgun blast fired by . stays behind to oversee the torture - execution of ( " I 'm a get medieval on your ass , " he tells him ) , but promises that as long as never mentions what happened and never returns to , will forget that betrayed him in the boxing ring . Butch agrees . In the final scene , and leave town on , 's chopper - style motorcycle . Story # 3 : The days earlier , flashing back in time to just after and finish killing for stealing ' prized possession , a gang member ( ) they had not known about bursts out of the bathroom where he had apparently been when and entered and empties a large pistol point blank at them . However , all of the bullets miss and , hitting the wall behind them , so they return fire and kill the gang member . is certain what occurred was divine intervention , but dismisses the idea . They leave with ( ) , ' inside man in the gang . In the car , continues his insistence that what happened in the apartment was a miracle and that he 's retiring from ' gang . leans over the front seat , asking if he believes in miracles , but accidentally shoots him in the head and kills him . The inside of the car is now covered in blood and brain matter . , furious at 's klutziness , drives to the house of his only friend in the , a former colleague named ( ) . lets them hide the car in his garage but angrily tells them that they have to get rid of the body within an hour -- before his wife comes home from her night shift at a hospital . calls at his home to explain their predicament . then calls ( ) , a suave and professional " cleaner " who solves problems . arrives at 's house and tells and how to clean up the car and themselves -- they have to strip out of their business suits , be sprayed down with a garden hose and wear 's spare T - shirts and shorts ( which explains their attire at the ) -- then helps them dispose of the car and body at a junkyard belonging to a discreet friend named , whose daughter is 's girlfriend . With the whole situation resolved , and decide to have breakfast at the , where they continue their discussion about miracles . reveals his plan to leave his criminal life and travel the globe as a mendicant , helping those suffering under tyranny . , upset that his friend and partner is leaving the life , mocks him , then goes to the bathroom . Just then and ( from the prologue ) begin their robbery of the diner . They furiously collect the cash from the register and the patrons ' wallets . gives his wallet , but when tries to take ' briefcase , pulls his gun and disarms . While holds at , explains to how , even earlier that morning , he would have killed and without a second thought . He recites his ersatz version of 25:17 again : " The path of the righteous man is beset on all sides by the iniquities of the selfish and the tyranny of evil men . Blessed is he who in the name of charity and good will shepherds the weak through the valley of darkness , for he is truly his brother 's keeper and the finder of lost children . And I will strike down upon thee with great vengeance and furious anger those who attempt to poison and destroy my brothers . And you will know my name is the when I lay my vengeance upon you . "Jules explains that while he previously thought it was cool to make such a cold - blooded passage the last thing his victims heard , he now realizes that the " tyranny of evil men " part of the passage refers to him , and he intends to become a better person . He and allow and to leave with all the money but not the briefcase . They leave the diner themselves and head to ' strip club.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The prologue , spoken by , shows the forging the One Ring which he can use to conquer the lands of Middle - earth through his enslavement of the bearers of the of powerful magical rings given to individuals from the races of , Dwarves and . A Last of and is formed to counter and his forces at the foot of , but himself appears to kill , the High of and , and - , High of the . After falls , his son , , grabs the hilt of his father 's broken sword , and slashes at 's hand . The stroke cuts off 's fingers , separating him from the and vanquishing his army . However , because 's life is bound in the , he is not completely defeated until the Ring itself is destroyed in the lava and fire of , where it was forged . takes the and succumbs to its temptation , refusing to destroy it , but he is later ambushed and killed by on the shores of the . The ring is lost in the riverbed . The is found 2,500 years later , and eventually it comes to the creature , who takes it underground for five centuries , giving " unnaturally long life . " The " abandons " him however , and is found by the hobbit , much to the grief of , who called it his " precious " . returns to his home in the with the , and the story jumps forward in time sixty years . At his 111th birthday , leaves the to his nephew and adopted heir . The soon learns it is the , and sends him to with , with plans to meet him there after goes to to meet the head of his order , . Saruman reveals that the , or , have left to capture the and kill whoever carries it ; having already turned to 's cause , he then imprisons atop his tall tower home , . sees 's ultimate plan ; he has begun to destroy the forest surrounding for fuel to forge weapons for an army of larger and stronger orcs , the - hai . and are soon joined by fellow hobbits and . After encountering and eluding a on the road , they manage to reach , and there they meet a man called , who agrees to lead them to Rivendell and helps them elude the again . The hobbits agree because is n't there to guide them . After some travelling , they spend the night on the hill of , where they are attacked by the . battles the spectres and fights them off , but is grievously wounded with a blade , and they must quickly get him to Rivendell for healing . While chased by the , is taken by the to the elvish haven of , and healed by her father , . In meets , who explains why he did n't meet them at as planned -- while imprisoned atop , he was able to escape with the aide of , a giant eagle . In the meantime , there are many meetings between various peoples , and calls a council to decide what should be done with the . The can only be destroyed by throwing it into the fires ( that is , lava ) of , where it was forged . is located in , near 's fortress of - dr , and will be an incredibly dangerous journey . Frodo volunteers to take the Ring to as all the others argue about who should or should n't take it . He is accompanied by his hobbit friends and , as well as , who is revealed to be Aragorn , the rightful heir to the throne of . Also travelling with them are the , the and , the son of the of . Together they comprise the of the . The set out and try to pass the mountain , but they are stopped by the freezing cold and by , who uses his wizardry to create an avalanche . They are forced to travel under the mountain through the of . After journeying partway through the , accidentally gives away their presence to a band of . The encounter a , an ancient demon of fire and shadow , at the of - . Gandalf confronts the on the bridge , allowing the others to escape the mines , while he falls with the creature into the abyss below . The group flees to the elvish realm of , where they are sheltered by its rulers , and her husband . is tested when she tries to convince to give the ring to her but she regains her senses and bids him to protect the ring until it can be destroyed . After resting , the band decide to travel on the towards . Before they leave , gives the of , a light source . After landing at , , affected by the ring 's power , tries to take the Ring from , who manages to escape by putting the on his finger and vanishing . Knowing that the 's temptation will be too strong for the , decides to leave them and go to alone . Meanwhile , the rest of the are attacked by - , larger and stronger orcs bred by that can withstand sunlight . and , realizing that is leaving , distract the orcs , allowing to escape . In a desperate act of self - redemption , Boromir rushes to the aid of the two hobbits but is mortally wounded by the commander , and and are captured . Aragorn , , and find , who regrets attempting to steal the and dies . His body is later placed in a boat and sent over the of and down the . They decide to pursue the orcs and rescue the hobbits , leaving to his fate . joins before he leaves , and together the two walk into toward Mordor.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The film tells the story of three men who pursue , often at the expense of others , information about the location of a buried treasure of coins . The first character introduced in the movie is ( the ) - called - ( ) , who has a bounty on his head for numerous crimes . has a partnership with ( The , played by ) in which the latter turns him in for the reward money which the two then split after saves from hanging at the last moment . Meanwhile , a third character called ( , playing the ) has learned of a hidden trunk of gold owned by a soldier named . He sets off to find the gold . Soon , grows tired of his relationship with , and leaves in the desert with no water . Tuco survives and is intent on exacting revenge on his former partner . He finds , and turns the tables by planning to abandon him in the desert . However , before can complete his torture in the desert , a runaway stagecoach full of dead and dying soldiers appears . , the man with knowledge of the whereabouts of the gold , dying from thirst , persuades Tuco to get him a drink by disclosing the name of the graveyard where the loot is located . As goes for the water , dies , but not before revealing the name on the grave to . Dressed in the uniforms of the dead soldiers , takes , near death , to a local Catholic mission run by his brother , a priest . While recovers , and his brother ( ) confront each other about the mistakes each has made in life . After leaving the mission , the two , still impersonating soldiers are captured and taken to a prison camp . has followed the trail of to the prison camp and is posing as a . and his colleague beat and torture until he reveals the location of the cemetery . When learns that only knows the name , he changes tactics . He proposes a partnership , and accompanied by five or six other killers , they leave to find the coins . Tuco escapes while being transported from the camp by train , in the process killing . At the nearest town , encounters a bounty hunter ( ) he had wounded at the beginning of the film , who seeks his revenge . As shoots the bounty hunter , , who is in the same town with , recognizes the sound of 's gun , seeks him out , and he and resume their old partnership . Together they kill Eyes ' gunmen along the main street , but Eyes himself escapes . and stumble on a battle between the and the , fighting for a bridge of questionable strategic value . Since the cemetery is on the other side of the bridge , they decide to destroy it and force the soldiers go somewhere else to fight . While they are setting up the dynamite , reveals that the cemetery is called and reveals that the coins are buried in a grave marked by the name of ( Gottbetter).On the other side of the river deserts by horseback and finally enters the nearby graveyard . Tuco frantically searches around the graveyard for the grave of . Eventually finds it , but before he can begin digging he 's held at gunpoint by , who in turn is held at gunpoint by , who has finally caught up to both of them . However , reveals that 's grave contains only a decomposing corpse . then leads the three of them into an empty patch of land in the middle of the cemetery . He writes the name of the real grave under a stone which he places in the center . At the conclusion of a three - way shootout , shoots and finds his gun empty , having been unloaded the previous night by . then reveals that the real location of the coins is a grave marked " Unknown " right next to . Tuco digs up the loot from the grave only to find himself once again staring down the barrel of 's gun , who now holds a noose in his hand . After placing into the noose , fastening it to a nearby tree and making stand on the unstable wooden cross of one of the graves , takes half the coins and rides away while cries for help . In a dramatic twist , turns around to shoot the rope above 's head , as he used to do in their times of partnership , freeing him one last time before riding off as screams in rage.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The film begins with a feather falling to the feet of who is sitting at a bus stop in , . picks up the feather and puts it in the book , then tells the story of his life to a woman seated next to him . The listeners at the bus stop change regularly throughout his narration , each showing a different attitude ranging from disbelief and indifference to rapt veneration . On his first day of school , he meets a girl named , whose life is followed in parallel to 's at times . Having discarded his leg braces , his ability to run at lightning speed gets him into college on a football scholarship . After his college graduation , he enlists in the army and is sent to , where he makes fast friends with a black man named , who convinces to go into the shrimping business with him when the war is over . Later while on patrol , 's platoon is attacked . Though rescues many of the men , is killed in action . is awarded the of for his heroism . While is in recovery for a bullet shot to his " butt - tox " , he discovers his uncanny ability for ping - pong , eventually gaining popularity and rising to celebrity status , later playing ping - pong competitively against Chinese teams . At an anti - war rally in , reunites with , who has been living a hippie counterculture lifestyle . Returning home , endorses a company that makes ping - pong paddles , earning himself $ 25,000 , which he uses to buy a shrimping boat , fulfilling his promise to . His commanding officer from , , joins him . Though initially has little success , after finding his boat the only surviving boat in the area after , he begins to pull in huge amounts of shrimp and uses it to buy an entire fleet of shrimp boats . invests the money in and is financially secure for the rest of his life . He returns home to see his mother 's last days . One day , returns to visit and he proposes marriage to her . She declines , though feels obliged to prove her love to him by sleeping with him . She leaves early the next morning . On a whim , elects to go for a run . Seemingly capriciously , he decides to keep running across the country several times , over some three and a half years , becoming famous . In present - day , reveals that he is waiting at the bus stop because he received a letter from who , having seen him run on television , asks him to visit her . Once he is reunited with , discovers she has a young son , of whom is the father . tells she is suffering from a virus ( probably , though this is never definitively stated ) . Together the three move back to , . and finally marry . The wedding is attended by , who now has prosthetic legs and a fiancee . dies soon afterward . The film ends with and son waiting for the school bus on little 's first day of school . Opening the book his son is taking to school , the white feather from the beginning of the movie is seen to fall from within the pages . As the bus pulls away , the white is caught on a breeze and drifts skyward.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > We back out of the webbing of neurons and brain cells as the title credits appear , finding ourselves emerging from a pore on the sweat - glistened skin of the protagonist : our narrator ( ) , as he looks down the barrel of a gun that 's been stuck in his mouth . The gun is held by a man named ( ) who checks his watch , counting down to ' ground zero ' before he asks if the narrator has anything to say . The narrator mumbles through the gun before it 's removed and says more clearly that he ca n't think of anything . As looks out of the high rise window to the dark city below them , the narrator recalls just how he met before stopping himself and bringing us to the beginning of the story . The narrator tells us he has n't slept for six months . His job as a traveling product recall for a car company does n't help his insomnia since he must travel often , experiencing bouts of jet lag in addition to the everyday stress of his position , admiring the ' tiny life ' of single - serving soap and shampoo at every location . If he ca n't sleep , he surfs the channels or browses through " " ( a parody of IKEA ) catalogs purchasing the next piece of decor to add to his apartment ; he 's a self - proclaimed slave of consumerism . He goes to his doctor seeking help , but all the doctor will do is suggest an herbal supplement instead of drugs and that the narrator visit a support group for testicular cancer to see real pain . There , the narrator meets ' ' ( ) , the ' big moosie ' and an ex - bodybuilder and steroid user who suffers from an extreme case of gynecomastia due to hormone treatment after his testicles were removed . is quite willing to hug the narrator in support . Stuck between 's enormous breasts , the narrator finally finds peace and bursts into tears . The emotional release allows him to sleep and he subsequently becomes addicted to support groups , mapping out his week attending different meetings and feigning illness . However , the appearance of a woman named ( ) throws the narrator 's ' system ' out of whack . He recognizes her as a ' tourist ' , having seen her at multiple meetings -- including testicular cancer -- and he is disturbed by her lies to the point where he ca n't sleep anymore . After one meeting , he confronts her . She argues that she 's doing exactly what he does and quips that the groups are ' cheaper than a movie and there 's free coffee ' . Instead of ratting each other out , they agree to split up the week and exchange numbers . Despite his efforts , the narrator 's insomnia continues . On a flight back from one of his business trips , the narrator meets . offers a unique perspective on emergency procedure manuals in the plane and they strike up a casual conversation . is a soap salesman , if he 's not working nights as a projectionist and slipping bits of porn between reels . The narrator arrives at the baggage claim to discover that his suitcase has been confiscated , most likely due to a mysterious vibration , before he taxis home . However , home , a fifteenth story condominium , has been blasted into the night by what was theorized to be a faulty gas line ignited by a spark from the refrigerator . Having nowhere to go , the narrator finds 's business card and calls him up . They meet in a parking lot behind a bar where invites the narrator to ask to come live with him ... on one condition : that the narrator hit as hard as he can . The narrator , though puzzled , complies and they engage in a fist fight before sharing a couple of drinks . The experience is surprisingly euphoric and the narrator and return to 's dilapidated house where it 's clear that is squatting . and the narrator engage in more fights over the coming days and they soon attract the attention of other ' tough guys ' . Finding their little fighting group growing , establishes a formal ' fight club ' in the basement of the bar where they had their first fight . Membership quickly increases and and the narrator fashion a series of rules , the first two being ' you do not talk about fight club . ' The rules are consistently broken , with members inviting their friends to join them . Time and again , proves his insightful , if unorthodox and immoral , views on life . The narrator meets up with by chance , telling her that he has n't attended any other meetings because he 's joined a new support group for men only . While he still treats her with mild contempt , it 's clear that he considers her with interest . When she overdoses on , she calls the narrator who , tired of her rambling , sets the phone down . He discovers later that picked up the phone , followed the call to 's home , and brought her back to the house where they engaged in vigorous sex , much to the narrator 's disgust . The next morning in the kitchen , finds the narrator , who is astonished to see her in his house . The 's astonishment insults her and she leaves in disgust . After she leaves , enters the kitchen and joyfully reveals that he and had sex the night before . He also gravely makes the narrator promise that he 'll never mention to . That night the narrator joins while he steals human fat out of the dumpster of a liposuction clinic . says that the best fat for making the soap he sells comes from human beings . Back in their kitchen , shows the narrator how to render tallow from the fat . After explaining a bit about the history of soapmaking , plants a wet kiss on the back of the narrator 's hand and dumps pure lye on the spot , causing a horrific chemical burn . refuses to let the narrator wash the lye off his hand , saying that water will worsen the burn , and tells the narrator that the burn is a rite of passage -- has burned his own hand in an identical way . also forces the narrator to accept allegiance to him and then neutralizes the burn with vinegar . Later , when they meet with a cosmetics salesperson at a department store , the narrator remarks that 's soap sells for a very high price . With the narrator , he holds a college dropout ( ) at gunpoint and threatens to kill him if he does n't pursue his dream of becoming a veterinarian . He allows ( ) , the owner of the bar where their fight club is held , to beat him up before coughing blood all over him and demanding to stay in the basement . Horrified , agrees . gives the club members a " homework assignment " : they will all pick a fight with a complete stranger and lose . The narrator says it 's a much harder task than anyone would think . accosts people in a downtown plaza ; another member antagonizes a priest . After a period of days , leaves and introduces the narrator to his newest hobby . Using his proficient skills in soap - making , has turned the basement of the house into a laboratory where he uses soap and other ingredients to make explosives . and the narrator continue managing fight club , but this time , at a much different frequency . Receiving flack at work , the narrator finally confronts his boss ( ) with knowledge about substandard practice and negotiates to work from home with increased pay to keep his mouth shut . When his boss objects and calls security , the narrator beats himself up severely so that , by the time security arrives , they are led to believe that the narrator 's boss assaulted his employee . eventually assigns homework to his recruits and preaches to them about the detriments of consumerism and relying on society and authority figures . He proposes to revert back to the time where a man 's worth depended on the sweat on his back and where he only used what he needed . This philosophy evolves into what calls ' , ' and the fighting in basements turns into mischievous acts of vandalism and destruction . Their actions do not go unnoticed , but manages to show the lead investigator that the very people he 's hunting are those that they depend on ; waiters , bus drivers , sewer engineers , and more . They threaten the police chief with castration and the investigation is called off . The dilapidated house where and the narrator live turns into central , where each new recruit is put through a rigorous period of initiation and training and where the latest plans are hatched . While grows , the narrator begins to feel more and more distant from and jealousy sets in , making him go so far as to beat up and disfigure one recruit ( ) because he ' wanted to destroy something beautiful ' . As they walk away from this fight club meeting , drives the narrator and two members in a large . In the rain , taunts the narrator , suggestion that he has n't even begun to live his life to his fullest potential . When he allows the car to drift into oncoming traffic , scolds the narrator for being weak and pathetic . then admits that he destroyed the narrator 's apartment . The narrator finally gives in , lets the car drift and they slam head - on into another vehicle . They emerge from the wreck with exclaiming that the narrator has a new life based on his living through a near - death experience . When disappears for a while , the narrator is left at home with an ever increasing band of members who watch television and laugh at their publicized acts of vandalism . When the narrator demands to know more about their mischief , tells him " The 1st rule of is you do not ask questions . "Later is killed during a botched sabotage operation and the narrator seeks to disband the group before things get out of control . He tries to find and discovers a list of phone numbers he recently used . The narrator trails the list all over the country , discovering that fight clubs have sprouted everywhere . At one particular bar , the bartender addresses the narrator as ' sir ' which prompts the narrator to ask if he knows him . The bartender , after being assured that he 's not being put through a test , tells the narrator that he is . In shock , the narrator returns to his hotel room and calls up , asking if they 've ever had sex . Though irritated , confirms their relationship and states that she knows him as " . " hangs up and suddenly appears in the room and confronts the narrator , telling him he broke his promise to not speak about to . A few minutes of conversation confirms that they are , indeed , one person . The narrator has insomnia ; he ca n't sleep so , whenever he thinks he is ( or at random parts of a day ) , 's persona takes over . The epiphany causes the narrator to faint . When he wakes up , he finds another phone list beside him with calls from all over the country . He returns to his home to find it completely empty but one bulletin board yields a display of folders detailing certain buildings within the financial district . He finds that each one has been infiltrated by members of and that is planning on destroying them , thereby erasing credit card company records and ' wiping the slate clean ' . In a panic , the narrator grabs all the information and reports himself to the local police . However , after telling the inspector everything he knows and being left with two officers , the narrator discovers that the officers are members and they tell him that they were instructed by him to ' take the balls ' of anyone who interfered with ... even him . The narrator manages to escape by stealing one of the officers pistols and runs to one of the buildings set for demolition . He finds an unmarked van in the parking garage filled with nitroglycerin and attempts to disarm the bomb . appears and goads him but the narrator successfully disarms the bomb . He and engage in a fierce fight which appears oddly on the surveillance cameras since the narrator is only fighting himself . The personality wins and reactivates the bomb and the narrator ' brings himself ' to another building where they can safely watch the destruction . Back at the opening scene the narrator , with the gun in his mouth , mumbles again and tells , " I still ca n't think of anything " . Tyler smiles and says , " Ah , flashback humor " . The narrator begs that abandon the project but is adamant . He professes that what he 's doing is saving mankind from the oppression of consumerism and unnecessary luxuries and that there wo n't even have to be any casualties ; the people who work in the buildings are all members , completely aware of the plan . Near breaking point , the narrator comes to realize that whatever does , he can do . He sees with the gun in his hand and realizes that it 's actually in his hand . He puts it up to his own chin and tells to listen to him . He says that his eyes are open and then puts the gun in his mouth and pulls the trigger . The bullet shoots out of the side of his jaw and is ' killed ' with a gaping wound to the back of his head . As the narrator recovers , members of arrive with snacks and in tow ( had previously instructed her to be brought to them).Seeing ' 's ' wounds , the members leave alone with him to fetch some medical supplies . ' ' stands with and tells her that everything 's going to be fine as the first detonation ignites the building in front of them . The others on the block soon follow suit and ' ' takes 's hand in his and tells her " You met me at a very strange time in my life . " They watch as the explosives go off and the buildings > 

 < synopsis > The story opens with a flashback to the first film , with Gandalf battling the on the of - , but this time continues from 's perspective , with the scene continuing to follow both as they hurtle into the abyss below , fighting while in free - fall . The moment they hit the water of an underground lake , awakens from his dream and continues his journey with his trusted and loyal friend , through the rocky region of , where they become lost . Soon they are attacked by the ring - possessed wishing to retrieve " his precious " from the ones he thinks stole it from him . The subdue and bind him with 's rope given to him by the elder in . howls and that the rope burns his skin , prompting to complain that 's wailing will draw the attention of orcs or others . Sam distrusts and wishes to abandon him , but understands the burden of the creature and takes pity on him . In need of a guide , removes the rope from 's neck and persuades him to lead them to the of . In , the pack of - run across the grassy landscape with their captives and . Aragorn , and are in pursuit , following three days of running , surmises the are being taken to , where is marshaling his - hai forces to do the bidding of . In the kingdom of , home of the horse lords , is mentally and physically weak due to the enchantments of his steward , , who is secretly in the service of . and of incited by freely roam the land , marauding and killing , including the king 's only son Thodred . 's nephew interrogates , angrily realizing he has lustful eyes for 's sister and that he is now an agent of . banishes for undermining his authority and sets forth to gather the remaining loyal men of 's fierce cavalry , the , throughout the land . and his ambush and kill all of the and - holding the two captive at nightfall . During the battle , and narrowly escape their captors by fleeing into the nearby forest . later encounters , and and in turn tells there were no survivors of the / - hai slaughter . Upon arriving at the battle site , uses his tracking skills and finds hobbit tracks that lead into . In flashback , we see & held captive as the - argue with a group of that have joined them . The orcs want to slaughter the hobbits and eat them , over the objections of the - hai leader . An argument ensues and the - slaughter one of the orcs for food . and flee into the forest , pursued by the orc who previously attacked them . They are aided by the oldest of the tree - like creatures , the , who takes them to the one he calls the , whom & assume to be Saruman ; we leave them looking up at him . and traverse the , passing the undead fallen warriors of the Second who haunt the marshes . becomes enchanted by the spirits living in the waters of the and falls in . He 's pulled out before he drowns by . The three also hide from a newly - seated on his flying fell beast , a large black dragon . In , , and discover that the mysterious white is ultimately Gandalf reborn , now known as the . He speaks of his ordeal w/ the , & we see his defeat of the demon . Gandalf summons , the of the - an ancient & noble race of horses - & the quartet proceed to . Meanwhile , , & reach the , finding it to be heavily guarded , ( they observe a contingent of from arriving to reinforce the garrison ) only to have reveal to them a less risky path ; remains distrustful , but gives him the benefit of the doubt & begins calling him . While observing the gate , the rocky ledge on which lays gives way and he tumbles down the cliff . rushes to help him and , in desperation , throws the cloak given him by over them both . Easterlings who 'd wandered over to investigate the disturbance , are unable to see them under the cloak which has the appearance of a boulder . & approach in , where has just died with at his bedside . After much ado , they exorcise 's spirit from and banish . is confronted with his dead son and , rather than risk open war , decides to flee to a large fortress called 's which in times of trouble has saved the people of . Gandalf leaves to find and his , promising to return within five days , as a strong attraction draws to during the journey to 's . flees to and tells of breaking from their grip ; then decides to destroy . In , battles his split personality in an attempt to befriend and and ultimately banishes , his " evil " half . The two hobbits are witness to an ambush of but are taken captive by soldiers of . Meanwhile , along the journey to 's , becomes more attracted to . When the travelers are attacked by 's and their riders , an unhappy is tasked with seeing the people of safely to 's . The wargs and orc - riders are quickly defeated but during the battle , is dragged by a and falls off a cliff into a raging river as the grief - stricken survivors reluctantly move on to the fortress . In , reveals his enormous - hai army to & sends them off to make war on 's ; & in the company of , realize the war is starting ; in , washes up on the river 's edge and is nudged back to consciousness by his horse , . Battered but undaunted , he rides to 's . In , knows that the age of is ending and convinces that it is hopeless to stay and she should leave for the . shows her a prophetic vision that if she waits for Aragorn , even if he succeeds in destroying and becomes of , he will still succumb to mortality ; will suffer grievously once he is dead and will be left to wither away ... she reluctantly agrees to leave . Meanwhile back in , and are taken to and brought before , the second son of , steward of , where they learn their captor is the younger brother of . eluded capture and , in order to save his life , is lured unknowingly into a trap by , bringing back his alter - ego . Faramir learns of the and , seeking to prove his worth to his father , decides the Ring shall go to . On his way to 's , spots 's army of - , which numbers at least 10,000 strong . His arrival is met with relief but it is short - lived with the news that there are only 300 men in the stronghold . He counsels Thoden to send for aid , but his pleas fall on deaf & despairing ears . At forest , and the other , & along for the ride , hold a to decide on the role of the in the war with . Back at 's , every male old enough to hold a sword is called to service , & the women fall back into the fortress . Night falls , the defenders ready for attack ; then , in the midst of despair , a battalion of archers from , led by , arrives to assist in the ensuing battle . The defenders wait on the walls as it begins to rain and lightning reveals 's massive army . In the pouring rain , an old man on the wall accidentally lets loose an arrow , killing an . The battle of 's begins with a flurry of arrows from both human and archers cutting down dozens of - hai . Scaling ladders are placed upon the , and the - hai swarm up to engage the defenders . Meanwhile , back at the Entish council , & become frustrated by the slow progress . At 's , the defenses are slowly being breached and the enemy manages to breech the wall through its sewer drain - which the treacherous told of - using a rudimentary explosive device created by the wizard . Despite and 's best efforts , the - manage to penetrate the main gate and soon the stronghold is overrun . In , and the other have decided to not have any involvement in the war . In the midst of battle , falls in battle and the few remaining fall back into the . In the , the have scaled the walls , and have breached the gate , forcing the defenders to also retreat into the . Frustrated further by the ' decision to not participate in the war , cleverly takes to the section of near that has decimated to build the forges necessary to make weapons for his army . is filled with rage at 's betrayal and commands all the to seek vengeance . They gather and embark upon ' the Last of the ' toward . At the ruins of , talks of sending his father a great gift , the ring , to be used as a weapon that will help win the war . tells him that the ring drove to madness & dishonor . Meanwhile , as the is now under attack , and remembering 's words before he departed - of looking for him at dawn on the 5th day - and the rest make one last gallant ride on horseback to attack the - army , in a desperate bid to allow the 's women and children to escape into the behind the . As the riders are surrounded and all seems lost , Aragorn looks up to see at the top of the tall hill before the fortress . With him are , and two thousand of the ; as they descend , the sun rises over the hill , blinding the army . The army is overwhelmed and its remnants try to flee only to run directly into a horde of huorns , primitive walking trees summoned to the region by . In , the attack , tossing stones and rocks while collapsing a dam to flood its surroundings and destroy the system of tunnels and foundries beneath it , while looks on frantically from his tower . In , the are confronted by a and its fell beast . With the help of , & 's well - aimed arrow , - who is feeling more & more the pull of the ring - narrowly escapes the 's efforts to capture him . As we watch the army at 's rout the evil army & the succeed in demolishing , narrates how the story must go on & they must finish their quest , regardless of the danger , / c there is still good in the world & it 's worth fighting for . hears & decides to free them . Gandalf and the others now admit a full war is inevitable ( as will surely seek retribution for the defeat of ) and their only hope rests with and , who have resumed their journey to . Accompanying them once again and feeling betrayed after his mistreatment by 's men , 's darker nature returns and decides to reclaim the ring by leading and to " her".</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > A young man , exhausted and delirious , washes up on a beach , looking up momentarily to see two young children ( and ) playing in the sand before he passes out . An armed guard ( ) discovers him and has him brought to a large , seaside palace where the proprietor , an elderly Japanese man , is told of the stranger 's arrival . The only objects found on him were a handgun and a brass top . The old man allows the stranger entry . He is dragged in and given some food which he struggles to eat as the old man picks up the brass top and says , " You remind me of someone ... a man I met in a half remembered dream . He was possessed of some radical notions . " The stranger looks up in realization as the scene shifts ... ( ) and his partner , ( - ) , speak to a prospective client , ( ) , in an eerily similar dining room about the services they provide ; specifically protection against thieves specialized in extracting valuable information from a subject while they 're dreaming . explains that , when one is asleep , one 's mind is vulnerable to attack and what he can do is train 's mind to subconsciously defend against extractors to protect whatever secrets he may be hiding . He backs up his claim by revealing that he is the most skilled extractor there is and knows all the tricks involved . Appearing skeptical , stands to leave , telling he will consider his proposition , and exits the room to join a small party in the main hall . casts a glance , saying , He knows as the room begins to shake . They walk to an outside balcony where other party - goers and points to a woman nearby , asking what she 's doing here . assures him that he 'll take care of it and to proceed with the job . He knows where 's secrets are ; he glanced over at a safe the minute mentioned the word . approaches the woman who asks if he misses her . He responds that he does but ca n't trust her anymore . They retreat to a private room where ties a rope to the leg of a chair and tosses the end out of the window . He tells the woman , ( ) , to take a seat as she asks him if the children miss her . pauses a moment before saying , " I ca n't imagine . " He then repels out the window to a ledge below , nearly falling when leaves her seat . He breaks into the room below and accesses the safe , swapping out the manila folder inside for another , as the lights in the room turn on . He turns with his gun out to see aiming a gun at him and standing beside and a guard holding . asks if ' she told him ' as he slides his gun across the table . responds , " That you are here to steal from me , or that we are actually asleep?"This proves true : the three of them are hooked up to a PASIV ( Portable ) device which feeds them the sleep drug , keeping them all asleep and allowing dream - sharing . They are watched over by ( ) , another of 's partners . He checks , sleeping on a bed , before going into another room to check on and , both asleep in chairs . 's chair sits above a tub full of water . Explosions and shouts outside get closer as a mob of rioters moves down the street . Inside the dream , holds her gun to 's head but tells her the threat is empty , as he hands the manila folder over to , since shooting him will only wake him up . smiles in agreement but says that pain is only in the mind and perceived as real as she shoots in the knee , causing him to cry out . dives across the table and retrieves his gun before shooting in the head . He then dashes out of the room under gunfire from 's guards . wakes up and instructs that things are falling apart but still has time to finish the job before he checks on the still sleeping . frantically opens the manila folder as the dream begins to collapse and shouts in anger as he finds blank pages inside . manages to hide away for a moment to look at the contents of the real folder which he 'd hidden in his jacket , gazing over the confidential files as the building crumbles around him . is crushed by debris and wakes up in the apartment , unseen to as he reaches under his pillow . tells to wake by giving him the kick . Nash pushes backwards into the tub and , as he hits the water , 's dream is flooded with massive waves cascading through the windows before he wakes up . , having reached under his pillow for his gun , grabs but is subdued by who tells him that not all the information he needed was in the file he stole . Saito laughs and claims that all the information he had was in the file because he knew of 's ruse all along . He allowed and into his mind as part of an audition which they failed , saying that ' your deception was obvious . 'Asserting that his employer , , wo n't accept failure , throws on the floor and demands that he tell them what they need to know about his expansion project . With his face pressed into the carpet , begins to laugh again and reveals that he is familiar with the material of the carpet ; it is supposed to be made of wool instead of polyester . Thus , he comes to the conclusion that he is still sleeping . Sure enough , , , , and are all asleep in the car of a train , watched over by a young man named ( - ) who monitors the time remaining on the PASIV device . He places headphones over 's ears and plays music as a cue that their time is running out . The music plays faintly within the dream but enough that can hear it . As the rioting mob outside draws nearer , commends on creating a dream within a dream but becomes confused at his inability to control this dream . Nash reveals that they 're not in 's dream ... they're in his . The mob breaks through the door , attacking everyone in the room , and , , and wake up on the train . berates , the architect of the dream , for designing the carpet wrong and throws a wad of money before leaving , telling them ' every man for himself ' . Saito wakes up moments later to find himself alone in the car , save for who 's resumed a casual pose , but smiles wryly to himself.\\nIn his apartment , spins his brass top and takes his gun , pointing it at his temple as the top spins . When it falls , he breathes a sigh of relief and puts the gun down . His phone rings and he picks it up to hear his two children , and ( and ) , on the other line with their grandmother . They ask when he 's coming home and he responds that he ca n't because of work . When asks if their mother is with him - an image of crosses his mind - pauses and tells him that ' mommy 's not here anymore ' . He tells them to behave and that he 'll send presents with grandpa before their grandmother hangs up . knocks on the door and tells their ride is on the roof . decides to fly to to lie low in lieu of their failed job for while says he 's returning ' stateside ' . asks him to send his regards as they open the door to the helicopter and see , beaten and bruised , and waiting for them . Apparently , had tried to sell out and for his own safety but has other interests . He offers a job performing ' inception ' for him , something claims is impossible . , however , says that it 's not impossible but extremely difficult since it involves planting an idea in someone 's mind rather than extracting one . He turns away , insisting that he 'll find a way to resolve relations with himself but then asks him if he wants to go home to his children in . He promises that , if he succeeds , all he will need to do is make a phone call and the charges keeping out of the country will be dropped . Desperate , and to 's exasperation , accepts . They board the helicopter with while two thugs carry away to an uncertain fate . En route , explains to the nature of inception , telling him that simply planting an idea in someone 's head does not guarantee that the idea will take . The subject may very well discover that the idea is not theirs and reject it . True inspiration , claims , is impossible , despite 's thoughts otherwise . Saito shares with them his reasoning for the job ; he needs the of a competing energy conglomerate to split up his father 's company , ensuring 's own Global complete domination over the energy production industry . Despite the daunting task , agrees to perform the job . drops them off at the airport and advises to choose his team wisely . Cobb travels to where he meets up with his father - in - law , ( ) , a professor at a university and the one who taught and about dream - sharing and designing dreams . asks for an architect , one as good as he , and points him to someone better . He introduces to a graduate student of his , ( ) who is immediately put to the test by to design a maze that takes one minute to create and two to solve . After impressing with her skills , he tells her more about his line of work and what is required of her . Her job as architect will be to design dreams and create virtual mazes for the dreamers subconscious to inhabit while allowing and his team to work . As they talk outside a cafe , attempts to make aware that they are actually in a dream . The realization causes to panic and the dream violently collapses . When they awake , finds they are in 's warehouse workshop where is monitoring them . shows surprise when says they 'd been under only five minutes when it felt like hours . explains that the mind functions faster in a dream , so time moves slower . They go under again and is given the opportunity to creatively alter the physics of the dream . Her architectural wonders cause the people in the dream - projections of 's subconscious - to search for the intruder - - like white blood cells drawn to a virus . When makes the mistake of creating a bridge from her memories , recognizes it and his subconscious reacts as a mob , separating from until appears and stabs her . She wakes up and rushes to the restroom while explains that 's subconscious became aware of her as an invasive being and she was unable to wake up right away because there was still time on the clock . The only way for her to wake up was if she died . takes out his top and spins it , sighing as it topples over . leaves the warehouse , angry and refusing to open her mind to if his subconscious is as tormented as it seems . returns to the room and assures that she 'll be back but he needs to make a trip to to recruit an old friend to the team . He finds ( ) gambling at a bar and offers him a place on his team as a forger / imitator . agrees before telling he 's being tailed , pointing to two men at the bar . recognizes them as Cobol thugs who must be aiming to collect the bounty on his head for the botched job . Eames creates a distraction while escapes , leading the thugs on a chaotic chase through the city streets . At the last moment , pulls up in a limousine and picks up first , then . He explains that he 's been tracing to protect his investment . Eames takes them to a local chemist he knows who experiments with and who might be an asset to their team . ( ) listens as explains that his job may require the use of a three - layered dream . says that this would be otherwise impossible , due to the instability of dreams the further down you go , if not for a special solution he 's concocted with a powerful sedative . To show its effectiveness , takes them downstairs where they see dozens of men sleeping under the watch of an old man ( ) . He tells that these men come here to ' wake up ' ; dreaming has become their reality . With the aid of the sedative , their sleep is deep and stable and they are able to dream for what feels to them like years . tries the sedative himself and is impressed with its affects , though shaken after waking from a vivid dream with . He convinces to join his team . Meanwhile , returns to the workshop where she tells that she meant to stay away but could n't resist the pure creation involved in architectural dreaming . takes her into a dream and introduces the notion of creating paradoxes , such as the steps . He also reveals that was 's wife and has since passed away . Despite 's malevolent nature within the dreams - her existence now only as a projection of 's - tells she was lovely in real life . The team bands together and decides that they will create a three - level dream with the third level containing the planted idea . The target in mind is ( ) , the CEO and heir of , whose father , ( ) , is slowly decaying with illness . Eames targets 's godfather and business partner , ( ) , to get a better grasp on the father - son dynamic and to use his imitation skills at their best . The team decides that , in order to get to split up his father 's company and because of their complicated relationship , a positive idea will trump a negative one ; ' my father wants me to be my own man . ' Saito oversees most of the plans and , because he wants full verification of any success or failure , decides that he will accompany the team into the dreams as a ' tourist' . As the team prepares over the next few weeks , shows the significance of ' totems ' ; small , personal objects that enable a person to differentiate between dreams and reality . 's totem is his top , which topples over in the real world and keeps spinning in a dream . 's is a loaded die and he instructs to create one for herself that only she can touch to ensure its validity . She creates a semi - hollowed bishop chess piece as her totem . Wanting as much time as possible to complete the job , the team decides , with 's help , that they will perform the job on a 747 during an international flight from to , a 10 hour flight . This will give them a week in the first stage of the dreams . reveals that he 's bought the entire airline , making the job neater and without having to buy out certain sections of the plane for access . One evening , after a day of formulating plans , finds dreaming alone in the workshop . Curious , she hooks herself up to his machine and finds herself descending in an elevator . She sees sitting in a living room with who quickly detects 's presence . gets up and joins in the elevator , leading her through some of the levels that discovers are each specific memories ; something he originally told her never to do . Horrified after seeing 's torment over leaving home without saying farewell to his children , takes the elevator alone to the last level where she sees a hotel room , the contents of which are strewn on the floor . She steps on some broken glass and looks up from the couch , asking what she 's doing here . tries to explain that she just wants to understand but becomes defensive and picks up a shard of glass . arrives and takes back to the elevator as rushes forward , shouting at that he did n't keep his promise . and exit the dream and explains that the reason he ca n't go home is because of 's death , because it was thought that he killed her . He thanks when she does n't ask him if he did or not but she does warn him that he 's mistaken if he thinks he can cage like that . He needs to release his guilt over her death . Ariadne convinces to allow her to go with the team into the dreams because he needs someone who understands what he 's going through . At that moment , and arrive and announce that has died and will be accompanying the body to the in a few days . The team boards the flight and sits with in a sectioned - off first class cabin . returns 's passport , pick - pocketed by , as a conversation starter and then drugs his water before proposing a toast in his father 's honor . Within moments , is asleep and the paid - off flight attendant ( ) assists setting up and activating the PASIV device . All together , the team descends into , first , 's dream . It is raining heavily in as members of the team are picked up . and commandeer a taxi , pick up and and then as holds a gun to as part of the kidnap ruse . and follow in a separate car until a train suddenly barges down the middle of the street , hitting their car and temporarily stalling them . then opens on the taxi and the team is forced to take immediate evasive maneuvers , hiding out in a warehouse where its discovered that has been shot in the chest . is taken into another room while is laid on a table . Before can shoot him to end his misery and wake him up , stops him and explains that , due to the sedatives they 've taken , they wo n't wake up if they die . Instead , they 'll be sent to limbo ; a shared dream - state of raw subconscious where time is practically non - existent . The team is angered by this , wondering why they 've taken such a risk , as they contemplate what to do about the armed forces closing in on their location . They find out that 's subconscious has been trained to fight against extraction and the projections attacking them are part of that defense . With 's condition deteriorating and unable to wait much longer due to the approaching defense projections , the team decides they need to complete the job as quickly as possible . Ariadne confronts about the control he has over his own subconscious and he confesses that he ca n't keep out of his head . He tells her that they had been experimenting with dream states and wanted to see how far down they could go into their subconscious . They wound up in limbo together , unable to leave because of the time remaining on their PASIV clock . They recreated their lives , spending years worth of building . After so long , they began to perceive limbo as their reality . After something like 50 years , and killed themselves on train tracks to bring them back to reality . Despite returning to the real world , continued to believe that she was still dreaming and believed that dying was the only way to ' wake up ' , but she refused to leave without ; she loved him too much . On their wedding anniversary , went to the hotel room they always stayed in to find it trashed and the window open . Outside , on an opposite ledge , sat who revealed to that she filed a letter to their attorney expressing a fear for her life , effectively framing him in the event of her death and forcing him no other way than to join her . refuses to jump and attempts to bring to her senses , but she ignores him and jumps to her death . Since she declared herself legally sane by three psychiatrists , 's case for his innocence is overruled by the outstanding evidence against him . With no other choice , leaves his children behind with their grandmother and flees the country . tries to convince that 's death was not his fault and that he needs to focus on the mission . Eames prepares himself as an impersonation of while and interrogate , demanding to know the combination to his father 's safe . They pressure by using ' ' as leverage . shouts from another room as if being beaten before he is brought into the room with to try and get him to remember . He tells that the safe contains an alternate version of his father 's will , one that will dissolve the company if chooses so . ' ' tells that his father loved him and wanted him to build something of his own . As 's defenses close in on the warehouse , reveals that one word he could decipher out of his father 's last words was ' disappointed ' , convincing him that his father did n't love him . With the warehouse in danger of being infiltrated , the team pressure once again for a combination . He tells them a series of random numbers that come to mind before they load him into a van and drug him to sleep . They all get in and prepare to enter the second level of the dream while drives the van away from the pursuing projections . In 's dream , resolves to use ' ' , a method in which he introduces the subject to the fact that he 's dreaming in order to garner trust . He meets at a bar and tells him that he is there to protect him and someone is trying to access his mind . He convinces that he 's dreaming by introducing the strangeness of their surroundings and calms to control them . He helps remember that he 's been kidnapped and leads him to a hotel room ( the first few numbers of which match the first digits thought of for the combination ) where the rest of the team regroups . is in better health in this level of the dream , but soon begins coughing . When 's projection on arrives , convinces that it was who kidnapped him by asking if he saw being tortured by the kidnappers in his previous sleep level . Browning confesses that he was responsible for the kidnapping , as the second testament left to allowed him to destroy his father 's empire , which could not let him do it . suggests to that they enter 's dreams to figure out what was really in the safe so that can decide for himself . agrees , now unknowingly assisting in his own inception and the team is hooked up again , this time with remaining behind to watch over them and administer a synchronized kick when its time . As the team goes into the third dream , in actuality 's , is forced to fight off more of 's defensive projections while in the first dream continues to drive the van . The third dream is set in snow covered mountains where 's safe is heavily guarded in a mountainside fort . The team splits up to draw the guards away . goes with , travels alone to ward off the guards , and and begin ascending a mountainside to access a blind side of the fort . Meanwhile , momentarily loses control of the and it tumbles down an incline , the tumbling effect translates into 's dream as he fights off 's projections , the environment around him spinning as gravity reverses and then rights itself . As continues driving , he becomes cornered on an elevated bridge with one car full of projections stuck with him . plays music through 's headphones to warn him of the incoming kick before driving backwards off the bridge . Upon impact , the force sends in his dream flying and , as the plummets in mid air , there is a loss of gravity in 's dream . The impact also translates into the third level of the dream . and look up the mountainside and are forced to cut their lines as an avalanche sweeps down upon them . realizes they 've missed the first kick , but they still have time for the second one when the hits the water off the bridge . Van drives off the bridge : 10 seconds left to impact . 2 : 3 minutes to synchronize the kick . struggles with a way to do this without gravity . 3 : 60 minutes left . With little time left , demands to know if there is another way into the fort and relents into telling him of a secret underground entrance that and can access . send them there , all while 's condition deteriorates . They finally enter the main room where the safe is located while and watch from a snipers angle . Succumbing to his injuries , is left to lay down , coughing blood as continues forward . However , as comes into 's view , so does another person . drops in from the ceiling and shoots down before comes to his senses and shoots her . Eames is ordered to the room as and rush to the site . Finding dead , labels the mission a failure , since the only other place where has gone is limbo . , however , convinces him that , if they go into limbo , they 'll have enough time to find and bring him back . Eames agrees to use a defibrillator to jump start heart to help while and go under . Meanwhile , in dream level 2 , devises a unique plan . He uses phone wires to tie the team together and brings them into the elevator . He lines the outside of the car with explosives , timing down till the kick with the intention of using explosive force to create gravity and instigating a kick . In limbo , and tour the deteriorating world that he and once built . They see old homes and buildings before they find the one where knows must be . If they find , they 'll find because will want to use something wants to bring him to her . Sure enough , they enter the apartment and is waiting for them . She tries , again , to convince that his place is with her in their real home with their children but reveals a terrible truth , the reason why believed that her dreams were real . While they were in limbo , had stored away a truth that she did n't want to believe anymore ; her totem , placed within her safe , lying on its side , immobile ; telling her that her dream , her limbo , was reality . In an effort to save her mind , broke into her safe and spun the top to convince her that this world was not real . However , he did not know that , once they really woke up , she would continue to believe that . This was how he knew inception would work ; because he performed it on first and his guilt over her subsequent death has been plaguing him ever since . He tells that he will stay with her in limbo if she tells him where is and she reveals he 's on the porch . finds him there and pushes him off as an improvised kick . comes back to life in dream level 3 with ' aid and opens his own safe , finding within an image of his bed - stricken father muttering his last word . acknowledges that his father was disappointed that he could n't be him , but says , " No ... no . I was disappointed that you tried . " then points to a cabinet where finds the will ... and a paper fan his father made for him once as a child . Tearfully , looks up to see his father has passed and breaks down as the hits the water . 2 , hits the detonator and the explosives force the elevator down , creating artificial gravity on the team . 3 , a series of explosions set by rock the fort , collapsing the main floor . In limbo , the synchronization of kicks pulls on and she calls for to join her . says that he will stay in limbo , but not with . By this time , has died and joined limbo as well . must find him but promises to return . leaps off the side of the building and rides the kicks back to dream 1 . In the van , wakes up and escapes the submerged van with ' ' . and share an oxygen tank with before they escape the van , leaving . and ' ' make it to shore where reveals that his father really did want him to be his own man and that he 's going to do just that and liquidate his father 's company . Knowing the mission is a success , drops the mask . In limbo , washes ashore where the finds him . He is brought to the seaside palace where the elderly Japanese man recognizes his brass top . recalls what he was there to do and calls to , asking him to come back with him and honor their arrangement . The elderly reaches for 's gun . wakes up on the airplane and looks around , startled , to see and smiling at him . He looks at the now awake who remembers , picking up his phone and dials . The plane lands in and nervously moves through customs where security checks his passport , but allows him passage through , welcoming him home . walks past the rest of the team and , who pauses a moment as if recalling a half - remembered dream . Ahead of him , sees calling him over . They drive home together where hesitates before taking out his brass top . He spins it on the table in the kitchen as his children appear at the back door . He runs to them , elated to see their faces again as the top continues to spin , wobbles a bit ... and the screen turns to black . The very last moment of the film is a little more complex than indicated by the current synopsis ( see above ): " ... the top continues to spin , wobbles a bit .. " which indicates that has returned to reality . The actual script , by , differs from this . The script ends withBehind him , on the table , the spinning top is STILL . And we - FADE OUT.CREDITS.END.My feeling is that the author wished us to see as failing , which is in line with the rest of the film - everyone dying or hurting ; nothing positive , really , except for 's hopes . However , I also think that the director or producer wanted to leave the ending ambiguous , so that optimists would see a positive ending , and cynics would see something more pessimistic.\\n-----------\\nThe description of the movie 's end above does n't fully explain the final scene . Then it appears someone edited it by adding their subjective * interpretation * of the ending.\\nSo to clarify , here 's what ( objectively , without interpretation ) happens : enters his home and spins the top on the kitchen table as his children appear at the back door . He immediately goes to them , elated to see them , they all , the kids start telling him stories of what he missed while he was gone , he replies the way good parents do - showing he 's enthusiastic , fully focused on them , etc and they all start to walk away ( from the top ) . We continue to hear their chatter in the background as the video and audio focus in on the spinning top . It continues to spin . It wobbles just a little - just enough to leave the viewer wondering whether it 's going to keep spinning or not . End movie.\\n[My subjective interpretation : it 's left to the viewer to decide whether it keeps spinning or it falls . But the real point is that no longer cares.]</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > In this sequel to the previous movie , : A , the opening crawl reveals that after the destruction of the , the were forced to evacuate their base on the moon and the dreaded of the has pursued the across the galaxy , forcing them to establish a secret base on the remote ice planet . of the ( / voice : ) sends robotic probes in search of the base and its commander and hero , ( is patrolling near , he sees what looks like a meteor hitting the ground near his location . He reports to that he plans to investigate the fallen object but before he can ride his mount to the site , he 's knocked unconscious by an indigenous , polar bear - like predator , the wampa . Back at the base , the smuggler - pilot ( ) announces his intention to leave the and pay the debt he owes to the gangster the , much to the displeasure of ( ) . After discovers that has not returned from patrol and with the temperature dropping rapidly , he delays his departure and leaves the base to search for him on an ostrich - like creature called a tauntaun . Meanwhile , escapes the wampa 's lair , using the to retrieve his nearby light saber and wounding the beast , but is overcome by the cold outside . He sees an apparition of his late mentor , - ( ) , who instructs him to receive training from ( voice : ) on the planet . finds and gives him shelter , using his own tauntaun 's carcass to keep warm , until he can build a sturdier shelter . The two are rescued the following morning by a patrol . is taken to the medical bay to heal from the wounds he received from the . In his recovery room he 's met by , and ( ) . jovially reminds that he 's rescued him twice from certain danger . Sometime later , when ground scans detect an object outside the base perimeter at 12 , and , investigate , and find an Imperial probe droid that transmits the location of the base to the Imperial fleet before firing upon . hits the droid with a low - energy blast but the droid activates a self - destruct function and explodes . On the bridge of 's massive flagship , the droid 's transmission is picked up by , but his superior , fleet , dismisses the message until sees the transmission and realizes it is the base . He overrules Ozzel and orders the to the system . Later , as the emerges from hyperspace , is informed by his infantry commander , , that the have set up infantry trenches and a powerful energy shield to protect them from the 's orbital bombardment . Ordering Veers to launch a surface attack , is furious that has clumsily given away the element of surprise by bringing his ship out of light speed too close to the planet , and he communicates this displeasure to as he promotes him to admiral while is given 's own fatal brand of reprimand . On the surface , the Imperial forces land their ground assault troops , a unit of over a dozen four - legged - " walkers " ( along with a few dozen two - legged - walkers ) beyond the energy shield and leads his squadron of flying speeders into battle . Realizing that their blasters can not damage the heavily armored walkers , devises an attack plan that has his squad using their towing cables to bind the legs of the walkers to trip them , making them more vulnerable . A few walkers are destroyed but the Imperial forces eventually overpower the and destroy the generator powering the energy shield , capturing the base . , , , and their droid ( ) flee on board the . makes it back to the base after personally destroying one of the walkers and speeds off in his X - Wing fighter with astromech droid - ( space , discovers that the 's hyper - drive is damaged and it can not escape the Imperial blockade in space . During the confusion , they enter the nearby asteroid field , pursued by four - ; pilots the deeper into the field , and the four pursuing fighters are destroyed by the flying rocks . lands the inside a crater on one of the larger asteroids to hide and make repairs . Meanwhile , and - make a crash landing on the swamp planet of . Frustrated at his X - Wing having landed in a bog , makes camp and begins to eat his rations . muses about how the surrounding area seems familiar when he 's startled by a strange voice behind him , a wizened , green little creature who acts obnoxiously , demanding to keep a small power lamp of 's and criticizes the rations eats . Telling that he knows where to find , goes to his small house to eat . While there , quickly grows impatient , wanting to meet immediately . The small creature begins to talk to the spirit of - , saying that is too old to begin training and that he has n't learned the patience a requires . realizes that the creature is himself . insists that harbors much anger like his father , . Obi - assures that will learn patience and will complete his training . tells that he is not afraid , to which gravely replies , " You will be . ' ' moves through the massive asteroid field , searching for the . A group of moves across the massive asteroid where the is hiding , and they release high - yield concussion bombs on the surface , trying to scare out the . The noise awakens , who has fallen asleep in the cockpit . Inside the asteroid cave , and argue while repairing the ship , eventually leading to a tender kiss . At the same time , orders the ' ' to continue searching the asteroid field for the , despite it 's captain 's assumptions that the ship was destroyed . Vader later confers with the powerful , about a new threat to the - . suggests that if could be turned , he would become a great ally to the Imperial cause . The asks , ' Can it be done ? ' ; simply replies , ' He will join us , or die , my Master' . While resting in the 's cockpit , is scared by an ugly creature on the ship 's windows . , and all venture outside the ship in breathing masks to investigate . notices that the ground has a strange consistency and suddenly shoots one of the beasts saw off the ship . As he suspected , they are mynocks , parasitic creatures feeding on the 's power cables . When tries to shoot one and misses , the whole cave rocks with a loud rumble . Suspicious , shoots the ground and the cave becomes more unstable . As they board the ship and race out they see that the mouth of the cave is actually the jaws of a titanic space slug . manages to escape as the creature takes another hungry snap at the ship . On the bridge of the , gathers a small group of intergalactic bounty hunters , the most feared of whom is ( ) . Vader promises them a large payoff if they can find the . In space once again , the is again chased by a , but evades pursuit cleverly and stealthily : after soaring into an attack position , he flies directly over the bridge of the star destroyer and hides the on the massive ship 's surface , attaching to it with the 's landing claws . They go undetected while figures out an escape plan . He surmises that the fleet will dump their refuse before jumping to hyperspace and they can float away unnoticed . checks his navigational log and realizes he 's been in the area before and that a planet called is nearby and that they 'll find one of his old smuggling buddies there who will offer them refuge . Unfortunately , their escape is not unanticipated ; following just behind him is a smaller ship , , piloted by who is working out where the is likely going . 's escape plan works and he sets course for , a gas mining colony on the nearby gas planet of , which is run by 's friend , ( Williams).On , undergoes 's rigorous lessons about the metaphysical nature of the involving levitating objects , performing acrobatic feats and meditation to promote calm and see possible visions of the future . brings to an old , gnarled tree that sits atop a cave . tells his apprentice that the cave is powerful with the dark side of the and that must explore it . Somewhat distrusting of his master , takes his light saber with him . Inside the cave , encounters a vision of , whom he fights . cuts off 's head with his light saber , but then the mask bursts open , revealing 's own face behind it . The cave is another test , one that carries a warning for to control his impulses and anger or he 'll end up like himself . has a vision of and in danger and agony . wants to rescue them , but and the ghost of - warn of the dangers of rashly leaving , because is still susceptible to the powerful temptation of the . Nevertheless , departs from and promises he will return to complete his training . Upon their arrival at , 's party is welcomed by . After agreeing to help repair his ship , invites him and the others to a meal . is distracted from the group when he hears the familiar beeping of an unit . Entering a small room , he is suddenly confronted by an unseen person why he 's in the room . A laser blast cuts C3PO down as he babbles to his attackers . Only is suspicious , but he arrives on the scene too late to see what happened . When 's party enter the dining room , they are captured by , along with who had tracked them to . insists he was forced to conspire with the to prevent them from occupying ( or likely destroying ) the city . In captivity , is tortured to lure to the city . is also tortured in his holding cell by an amplified screeching sound . As prepares to wait for to be lured to him by his friends ' agony , he tells that the rebels must never leave the city . , disgusted by 's treatment of and his friends , protests that the deal they struck never included that as a condition any more than handing over to . However , when threatens to leave a garrison in the city if keeps complaining , is forced to realize how helpless he is . Vader orders a carbon - freezing chamber prepared to freeze , which will hold him in suspended animation for transport to the . The process is tested on . As is lowered into the machine , declares her love for him . He is frozen in carbonite and alive in hibernation and handed over to , who intends to return his quarry to the for a large reward . Meanwhile , lands at and is lured into the carbon - freezing chamber . meets and a ferocious lightsaber fight ensues . While escorting their prisoners , 's Imperial troopers are intercepted by 's private security force , who set and the others free . , despite nearly being killed by a furious , insists that there is still a chance to save , and along the way they find R2 - . The group pursues and 's frozen form through , but arrives just as the bounty hunter 's ship flies away . After a desperate chase from Imperial troops , , , , and the two droids make their escape on the . As the leaves , is trapped on the bottom level of the carbon - freezing room . As he heads down a dark hallway ambushes him , stepping out of a doorway and swinging his light saber down . and 's fierce light brings them to a narrow platform above the city 's central air shaft . The corners on a catwalk , threatening him ; ' You are beaten ! It is useless to resist ! ' resumes the fight ; suddenly cuts an instrument panel apart . As unwittingly glances at it , slashes off 's right hand at the wrist , disabling him and sending 's light saber tumbling into the huge shaft . With cornered and defenseless , informs that he does not yet know the truth about his father . claims that killed him . , I am your father . "Luke screams in denial . Vader tries to persuade to join him , embrace the of the , and overthrow the with him . refuses , lets go , and falls off the platform into the abyss , signifying that he would rather die than join him . In free fall , is sucked into an air vent , shoots out of the underbelly of the floating city , and lands on an antenna hanging beneath . tries to pull himself back into the exhaust pipe , but with only one hand and no strength left , he is unable to pull himself up and the hatches close over his head , trapping him on the weather vane . He pleads for help from , but the old will not appear . then attempts to reach out to , using the . On the senses 's distress through the and orders to pilot them back to -- protests immediately but 's roar convinces him to do so . As they approach the underside of the city , spots hanging on to the weather vane and opens the 's outer hatch . falls off the weather vane and pulls him in just as the three fighters from the ' Executor ' appear , and start a rapid pursuit . As they leave , they are pursued by 's flagship . - , who discovered that the hyper - drive was merely deactivated while searching the city 's central computer , reactivates it and the escapes into hyperspace . Aboard the flagship , fears will kill him for this failure , but the simply walks away silently . In the final scene , the fugitive and defeated rebel fleet has assembled in a point beyond the galaxy to decide their next move . Aboard a medical frigate , is fitted with an artificial hand as and set out in the to locate with arranging to join them when he is released from medical care . and watch the ship speed off toward the galaxy.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The screen fills with green , cascading code which gives way to the title , ( 1999).A phone rings and text appears on the screen : " Call trans opt : received . 2 - 19 - 98 13:24:18 REC : ; " As a conversation takes place between ( - ) and ( ) , two free humans , a table of random green numbers are being scanned and individual numbers selected , creating a series of digits not unlike an ordinary phone number , as if a code is being deciphered or a call is being traced . Trinity discusses some unknown person . taunts , suggesting she enjoys watching him but they will have to kill him . Trinity counters that " ( ) says he may be ' the One ' , " just as the sound of a number being selected alerts that someone may be tracing their call . She ends the call . Armed policemen move down a darkened , decrepit hallway in the O ' the , their flashlight beam bouncing just ahead of them . They come to room 303 , kick down the door and find a woman dressed in black , facing away from them . It 's . She brings her hands up from the laptop she 's working on at their command . Outside the hotel a car drives up and three agents appear in neatly pressed black suits . They are ( ) , ( ) , and ( ) . and the presiding police lieutenant argue . admonishes the policeman that they were given specific orders to contact the agents first , for their protection . The lieutenant dismisses this and says that they can handle " one little girl " and that he has two units that are bringing her down at that very moment . replies : " No , . Your men are already dead . "Inside , easily defeats the six policemen sent to apprehend her , using fighting and evasion techniques that seem to defy gravity . She calls , letting him know that the line has been traced , though she does n't know how . informs her that she will have to " make it to another exit , " and that Agents are heading toward her . A fierce rooftop chase ensues with and an leaping impossibly from one building to the next , astonishing the policemen left behind . Trinity makes a daring leap across an alley and through a small window . She has momentarily lost her pursuers and makes it to a public phone booth on the street level . The phone begins to ring . As she approaches it a garbage truck , driven by , careens towards the phone booth . Trinity makes a desperate dash to the phone , picking it up just moments before the truck smashes the booth into a brick wall . The three reunite at the front of the truck . There is no body in the wreckage . " She got out , " one says . The other says , " The informant is real . " " We have the name of their next target , " says the other , " His name is . , aka " " ( ) , a hacker with thick black hair and a sallow appearance , is asleep at his monitor . Notices about a manhunt for a man named scroll across his screen as he sleeps . Suddenly 's screen goes blank and a series of text messages appear : " Wake up , . " " The has you . " " Follow the . " Then , the text says " , knock , ... " just as he reads it , a knock comes at the door of his apartment , 101 . It 's a group of ravers and gives them a contraband disc he has secreted in a copy of " and . " The lead raver asks him to join them and demurs until he sees the tattoo of a small white rabbit on the shoulder of a seductive girl in the group . At a rave bar stands alone and aloof as the group he 's with continue partying . Trinity approaches him and introduces herself . recognizes her name ; she was a famous hacker and had cracked the database . She tells him that he is in great danger , that they are watching him and that she knows that he is searching for answers , particularly to the most important question of all : what is the ? The pulsing music of the bar gives way to the repetitious blare of 's alarm clock ; it 's 9:18 and he 's late for work . At his job at , a leading software company housed in an ominous high rise , is berated by his boss for having a problem with authority , for thinking he 's special . listens to his boss , but his attention is on the persons cleaning the window of the office . Back at his bleak cubicle receives a delivery as " . " Upon opening the package he finds a cellphone which immediately rings . On the other end is , who informs that they 've both run out of time and that " they " are coming for him . tells him to slowly look up , toward the elevator . , , and are there , obviously looking for him , as a woman points towards 's cube . tries to guide out of the building but when he is instructed to get on a scaffolding and take it to the roof rejects ' advice , allowing himself to be taken by the . In an interrogation room the confront . They 've had their eye on him for some time . He lives a dual existence : one life as , a software engineer for a , the other life as , a computer hacker " guilty of virtually every computer crime we have a law for . " asks him to help them capture , considered a dangerous terrorist , in exchange for amnesty . gives them the finger and asks for his phone call . asks what good is a phone call if he 's unable to speak . finds that his lips have fused together . Panicked , he is thrown on the interrogation table by the and they implant a shrimp - like probe , a bug , in his stomach , entering through his navel . Neo awakens with a start in his own bed , assuming it has all been a bad dream . His phone rings and is on the other line . He tells that the line is tapped but they 've underestimated his importance . tells he is the One and to meet him at the bridge . There he is picked up by Trinity and two others in a car ; they all wear black latex and leather . A woman in the front seat , ( ) , suddenly points a gun at him and tells him to take off his shirt . tells him it 's for their mutual protection and that he has to trust her . He takes off his shirt and she uses a device to remove the probe that believed had been part of a nightmare . Trinity drops the bug out into the road where it slowly goes dark in the rain . Trinity takes to . explains that he 's been searching for his entire life and asks if feels like " in , falling down the rabbit hole . " He explains to that they exist in the , a false reality that has been constructed for humans to hide the truth . The truth is that everyone in the world is a slave , born into bondage . holds out two pills . In his left palm is a blue pill . If takes it he will wake up in his bed and " believe whatever you want to believe . " But if he takes the red pill in 's right hand , then " you stay in and I show you how deep the rabbit hole goes . " takes the red pill . As the rest of 's crew straps him into a chair , is told that pill he took is part of a trace program , to " disrupt his input / output carrier signal " so that they can pinpoint him . looks at a shattered mirror placed next to him which miraculously repairs itself . touches the surface and the silver begins to creep over his skin , engulfing him as 's crew attempt to locate something on the monitors around them . The silver fluid covers him entirely , moves down his throat and he blacks out . He awakens inside a pinkish / purple embryonic pod , extending from the side of a huge column , part of a massive power plant . He is hairless and naked , with thick black tubes snaking down his throat , plugged into the back of his skull , his spine , and invading most of the rest of his body . He finds his pod is open and that he is surrounded by tower after tower of pods just like his , all filled with bodies . Suddenly a menacing , hovering nurse robot grabs him by the throat . The cable inserted into the base of his skull suddenly detaches . The rest of the tubes pop off his limbs and is flushed down a tube into an underground pool of filthy water . Just as he 's about to drown in the muck a hovercraft appears above him , snags him and hauls him into its cargo bay . finds himself surrounded by 's crew again , but they are dressed differently , in simple knit garments . Just before passes out says to him , " Welcome to the real world . drifts in and out of consciousness . At one point he asks , " Am I dead ? " " Far from it , " replies . Again he wakes , his body a pincushion of acupuncture . " Why do my eyes hurt ? " he asks . " You 've never used them , " replies . finally wakes , fully clothed , with a short shock of hair on his head . He removes a connector that is sunk deep into his arm and reaches to find the large socket at the back of his neck when enters the room . " What is this place ? " Neo asks . " The more important question is when , " says , " You believe it is the year 1999 , when in fact it is closer to the year 2199 . " goes on to say that they really do n't know when it is . He gives a tour of his ship , the ( they pass a plaque stating it was built in 2069 ) , an old , beaten hovercraft . is introduced to 's crew including ; ( ) , a man with long , flowing black hair ; ; ( bald with a goatee ) ; two brawny brothers , ( ) and ( ) ; and a young , thin man named ( gets to the point . " You wanted to know about the , " he says , ushering him to a chair . sits down in it and straps him in . A long probe is inserted into the socket at the back of 's skull . wakes in a world of all white . He is in the , a " loading platform " that and his team use to prepare newly freed humans to deal with the world . Gone are the sockets in 's arms and neck and his hair is grown in . tells him that what he is experiencing of himself is the " residual self image , the mental projection of your digital self " and bids him to sit while he explains the truth . " This , " he says , showing an image of a modern city , " is the world that you know . " A thing that really exists " only as part of a neural , interactive simulation that we call the . then shows the world as it truly exists today , a scarred , desolate emptiness with charred , abandoned buildings , black earth , and a shrouded sky . goes on to say that " at some point in the early 21st century all of mankind was united in celebration as we gave birth " to artificial intelligence , a " singular consciousness that birthed an entire race of machines . started a war , and no one knows who , but it was known that it was mankind who blotted out the sky , attempting to deprive the machines of the solar power they required to function . Instead the machines turned to humans as a power source , enslaving them like had been before he was freed . goes on to explain that a human 's body provides " more electricity than a 120 volt battery and over 25k BTUs in body heat . " shows fields where machines grow human beings , connecting them to their outlets , ensconcing them in their pods , and feeding them with the liquefied remains of other human beings . " The , " says , " is a computer - generated dreamworld created to keep us under control , to turn us ... " into a mere power source , into coppertop batteries . rejects this information so feverishly that he demands release from the . He is back in the chair on the hovercraft . The crew pull out the spike at the back of his head and he fights to free himself from this harsh reality , only to end up vomiting on the floor and passing out . When wakes up in his bunk , is beside him . " I ca n't go back , can I ? " Neo asks . " No , " says . He apologizes to for breaking a cardinal rule : after a certain age people are n't brought out of their simulacrum , but explains he had to bring out . When the was created there was a man born inside it who could create his own reality inside it . It was this man who set and the others free . When he died , the ( ) prophesied that he would return in another form . And that the return of the would mean the destruction of the . As long as the exists , humanity will continue to live in complacency inside it and the world can never be free . " I did what I did because I believe that search is over , " says . The next day starts his training . Tank is his operator . Tank and his brother are " 100 % pure old - fashioned , homegrown human . Born in the real world ; a genuine child of . " , explains , is the last human city , buried deep in the earth , near the core , for warmth . Tank straps back into the jack - in chair , by - passes some preliminary programs and loads him up with combat training , starting with . When hits " load " is shocked by the force of the knowledge pouring into him . " I think he likes it , " says , " want some more ? " " Hell yes , " replies . is fed a series of martial arts techniques including , Do , and . and are amazed at 's ability to ingest information , but wants to test . and stand in a sparring program . The program has rules , like gravity . But as in many computer programs , some rules can be bent while others can be broken . bids to hit him , if he can . They fight with impressively attacking but easily parrying and subduing him . The rest of the crew gathers around the monitors to watch the fight . ends up kicking into a beam , explaining to him that the reason he has beaten him has nothing to do with muscles or reality . They spar again . " What are you waiting for ? " asks him . " You 're faster than this ! " finally brings a punch near his teacher 's face . stops , telling " I know what you 're trying to do . " tells him he 's only trying to " show him the door " and that must step through it . A " jump " program is loaded . Both men now stand on one of several tall buildings in a normal city skyline . tells he must free his mind and leaps easily but impossibly from one building to the next . nervously tries to follow him and does n't make the jump , falling to the pavement below . wakes back in the with blood in his mouth . " I thought it was n't real , " he says . " Your mind makes it real , " replies . " So , if you die in the , you die here ? " " The body can not live without the mind , " says , underlining the very real danger faced in the simulation . Later , while is sleeping deeply , brings him dinner . Outside his room , remarks that never brought him dinner . He asks why , if thinks is the , he has n't taken him to see the yet . Trinity says he 'll take him when he 's ready . and are walking down a standard city street in what appears to be the . explains that the is a system and that the system is their enemy . All the people that inhabit it , the people they are trying to free , are part of that system . Some are so inert , so dependent upon the that they can never be free . notices a stunning girl in a red dress . " Are you listening to me ? " asks . He asks to look at the girl again . turns to face , pointing a gun straight at his head . stops the simulation , which has just been created to look like the . asks what the are . " Sentient programs , " says , that " can move in and out of any software hard - wired into their system , meaning that they can take over anyone in the program . " Inside the , " says , " They are everyone and they are no one . " Thus and his crew survive the by running from them and hiding from the Agents even though they " are guarding all the doors . They are holding all the keys and sooner or later , someone is going to have to fight them . " But no one who has ever stood up to an has survived ; all have died . Still , is certain that because the live in a world of rules that they can never be as strong , never be as fast as he can be . " What are you trying to tell me , " asks , " That I can dodge bullets ? " " When you 're ready , " says , " You wo n't have to . " Just then gets a phone call . " We 've got trouble , " says on the other line . The is on alert . They see the holographic image of a squiddy , a search and destroy sentinel , which is on their trail . They set the ship down in a huge sewer system and turn off the power . Tank stands at the ready switch of an , electro - magnetic pulse , the only weapon man has against the machines in the real world . Two squiddies search for the ship -- the crew can see them -- but they move on . Neo startles , who is working at a computer console streaming with green . offers a drink and says that he knows what is thinking , " Why , oh why did n't I take the blue pill ? " Neo laughs but is unsettled . asks if has told him why he 's here . Neo nods . " What a mind job , " says , " so you 're here to save the world . "Cypher is now in a fancy restaurant with in the . asks if they have a deal . cuts up a juicy steak and ruminates that he knows the steak is merely the simulation telling his brain that it is delicious and juicy , but after nine years he has discovered that " ignorance is bliss . " He strikes a deal for the machines to reinsert his body into a power plant , reinsert him into the , and he 'll help the . He wants to be rich and powerful , " an actor " maybe . says he wants access codes to the mainframe in . says he ca n't do that , but that he can get him the man who does , meaning . Meanwhile , inside the 's small dining room in the real world , the rest of the crew is trying to choke down the oatmeal - gruel that they have as sustenance . Mouse muses on the mistakes the machines may have made trying to get sensations right , like the taste of chicken . Since they did n't know what it tasted like they let everything taste like it . interrupts the meal , announcing that he 's taking to see the . , , , , , and are jacked into the . As they walk out of a warehouse secretly throws his cell phone into the garbage . On the car ride to the , asks if she has seen the . says that she has but when she 's asked just what she was told by the , she refuses to answer . The , explains , has been with them since the beginning of the . She is the one who made the of the and that would be the one to find him . She can help find the path , he says . He enters the apartment of the . Inside are the other potentials : a mother figure and numerous children . One child levitates blocks , one reads Asian literature , another is playing chess . One bald child is bending spoons . He gives one spoon to and says , " Do not try and bend the spoon , that 's impossible . Instead , only try to realize the truth ... that there is no spoon . " Neo bends the spoon as he 's called in to see the . The is baking cookies . She sizes up and asks him whether he thinks he is the One . admits that he does not know and the does not enlighten him . Neo smiles and the asks him what is funny . admits that had almost convinced him that he was the One . She accepts this and prophesies that believes in so much that he plans to sacrifice himself . She tells that either he or will die , and that will have the power to choose which one it will be . She then offers him a cookie and promises him that he will feel fine as soon as he 's done eating it . As the crew returns to their jack point , many floors up in an old hotel , , in the control room , notices something odd . Meanwhile , walking up the stairs , sees what appears to be the same cat cross a room twice . " vu , " he says , which gets the attention of and . , they explain to him , is a glitch in the ; it happens when they reset the computer parameters . Outside , the phone line is cut . Mouse runs to a window which has now been bricked in . They are trapped . picks up two machine guns but he 's no match for the police coming into the room . He 's riddled with bullets . Back on the , the real spurts blood from his mouth and dies in the chair . More police and stream into the bottom of the hotel . has find a layout of the building they 're in , locating the main wet wall . The arrive on the floor they 're on , finding a coat that has left behind . They only find a hole in the bathroom wall . Meanwhile the crew is climbing down the plumbing of the wet wall . As the police approach sneezes , once more giving them away . The police open fire . The crew , including , begin to fire back . An takes over the body of one of the policemen , reaches into the wall , and grabs by the neck . , who is above in the walls , breaks through the wall and lands on the agent , yelling to Trinity to get out of the building . A fierce battle between and ends with face down on the tile . sends the police unit in to beat him with their batons . returns to the before , , and . As Tank attempts to bring the others back , attacks him from behind with an electronic weapon . attempts to tackle , but electrocutes him as well . Trinity attempts to call but pulls the headset off of the smoking remains of Tank and answers . As talks to inside the he leans over the still form of in the hovercraft . recounts the things he hates about the real world , the war , the cold , the goop they have to eat , but most especially and his beliefs . " He lied to us , . "Cypher pulls the plug out of the back of 's head , and falls down dead in the . then moves to Switch and as she protests " Not like this ... " in the , kills her on the ship . She falls down dead before and . moves on to 's supine form , saying that if is the , a miracle will prevent from killing can he be the One , if he 's dead ? " he asks . He continues badgering , asking her if she believes that is the One . She says , " Yes . " screams back " No ! " but his reaction is incredulity at seeing still alive , brandishing the weapon that had used on him . Tank fries with the electrical device . Tank brings Trinity back and she finds out that is dead . Meanwhile , a tray of torture instruments near him , marvels at the beauty of the as he gazes out at the city all around them . He informs , who is tied to a chair , that the first was designed as a utopia , engineered to make everyone happy . " It was a disaster , " says , people would n't accept the program and " entire crops were lost . " " Some believed , " continues , " that we lacked the programming language to describe your perfect world . But I believe that , as a species , human beings define their reality through misery and suffering . The perfect world was a dream that your primitive cerebrum kept trying to wake up from . Which is why the was redesigned . " compares humans to dinosaurs and that evolution is taking hold . Another enters and relays that there may be a problem ( as they now know that has failed).Back on the hovercraft the shuddering form of betrays the torture he 's being put through by the in the . Tank realizes that they 're trying to get the codes to the mainframes of 's computers ; each ship 's captain knows them . Because a breach of 's defenses would mean that the last remaining vestiges of mankind would be wiped out , says their only choice is to unplug , effectively killing him . Back in the , the process their next move . If is dead , they deduce that the remaining humans on the ship will terminate . They decide to stick to their original plan and to deploy the . is performing what amounts to last rites for , laying one hand on his head as his other moves to the back of his skull to remove the jack . Just as he 's about to pull it out stops him . He realizes that the was right . He now has to make the choice to save himself or to save ; his choice is to head back into the . Trinity rejects the idea . gave himself up so that could be saved since he is the . not the , , " says , relaying his understanding of the discussion with the Oracle : she did not enlighten him as to whether he was the promised . And , since was willing to sacrifice himself , knows that he must do that same . Tank calls it suicide ; it 's a military building with Agents inside . says he only knows that he can bring out . Trinity decides to come with him , reasoning with that he will need her help and she 's the ranking officer on the ship . " Tank , " she says , " load us continues to share his musings with a brutalized . Because humans spread to an area , consume the natural resources and , to survive , must spread to another area , says we are not mammals but viruses , the only other creature that acts that way . In the , and get armaments . " , " protests , " No one has ever done anything like this . " " That 's why it 's going to work , " he replies . has yet to break and asks the other Agents why the serum is n't working . " Maybe we 're asking the wrong questions , " responds one . To that commands the other to leave him alone with . removes his earphone and his glasses and confides that he hates the , " this zoo , this prison . " admits that he must get out of this " reality . " He hates the stench . He 's sure that some element of the humans will rub off on him and that holds the key to his release . If there is no there 's no need for to be in the . " You are going to tell me , or you are going to die . "Downstairs , in the lobby , and enter , heavily armed . They shoot their way past the guards and a group of soldiers and make their way into the elevator . and enter the interrogation room to find with his hands still fixed on 's head . looks embarrassed and befuddled and the others tell him about the attack occurring downstairs . They realize that the humans are trying to save . In the elevator , arms a bomb . They both climb through a hatch to the elevator roof , attaching a clamp to the elevator cable . says " There is no spoon " before he severs the cable with a few shots . The counterweight drops , propelling and upward . The elevator falls to the lobby exploding upon impact and filling the floor with flames . The feel the rumble of the explosion and the sprinkers come on in the building . " Find them and destroy them ! " commands . On the roof , a helicopter pilot is calling " " as and take out the soldiers there . takes over the pilot and appears behind . Neo shoots several rounds at the , who dodges them and pulls his own weapon . "Trinity , " yells , " Help ! " But it 's too late . The begins to shoot . Instead of being shot , dodges most of the bullets , though two of them nick him . As the approaches , who is lying on the ground , he levels a kill shot but Trinity shoots him before he can fire . Trinity marvels at how fast has just moved ; she 's never seen anyone move that quickly . Tank downloads the ability to fly the helicopter to , who can now pilot the aircraft . Trinity brings the helicopter down to the floor that is on and opens fire on the three . The quickly fall and is alone in the room . Just as quickly the take over other soldiers stationed nearby . breaks his bonds and begins to run to the helicopter . The fire on him , hitting his leg . but realizes that he is not going to make the leap and throws himself out of the helicopter , a safety harness attached . He catches , but shoots the helicopter 's hydraulic line . Unable to control the helicopter , miraculously gets it close enough to drop and on a rooftop . grabs the safety line as the helicopter falls towards a building . Trinity severs the safety line connecting to the helicopter and jumps on it herself as the vehicle smashes into the side of a building , causing a bizarre ripple in the fabric of the building 's reality as it does . On the ship says , " I knew it ; he 's the One . hauls up to them . " Do you believe it now , ? " asks as he approaches the two . tries to tell him that the told him the opposite but says , " She told you exactly what you needed to hear . " They call , who tells them of an exit in a subway near them . The arrive on the rooftop but find only the safety harness and line . Though is angered , the other two are satisfied . A trace has been completed in the real world and the have been dispatched to attack the . In the subway , they quickly find the phone booth and exits out of the . A wino watches this occur . On the rooftop locks in to their whereabouts through the wino and appropriates his body . Meanwhile , as the phone rings , providing 's exit , she confides to that everything that the has told her has come true , except for one thing . She does n't say what that thing is and picks up the phone just as she sees the approaching . shatters the ear piece of the phone ; it 's impossible for to exit there now . Instead of running , which Trinity implores him to do as she looks on from the ship , turns to face . They empty their guns on each other , neither hitting the other . They then move into close combat , trading blows . sweeps 's head , breaking his glasses . " I 'm going to enjoy watching you die , , " says . They trade some thunderous blows with hitting so hard he spits up blood in the and in the chair aboard the ship . 's killing him , " says . gets back up , sets himself and beckons to start again . This time it 's who delivers devastating blow after blow . But counters , throwing into a wall then pummeling him with body blows . A wind from the tunnel signals that a subway train is approaching and has a wicked notion . He throws into the subway tracks then drops down there himself . He puts in a headlock and , in the glow of the oncoming subway says , " You hear that , ? That is the sound of inevitability . It is the sound of your death . Good - , . name , " he replies , " is . " Then , with a mighty leap , propels them to the ceiling of the tunnel . They fall back down and backflips off the tracks , leaving to the oncoming train . Neo heads for the stairs , but has already appropriated another body and emerges from the doors of the train . Meanwhile the have arrived to attack the ; there are five of them and they are closing fast . tells to charge the . reminds that they ca n't use the EMP while is in the . know , , do n't worry , " says , " He 's going to make it . "Back in the streets of the , swipes a cell phone from a nearby suit . He calls Tank : " , get me the hell out of here . " He races through a crowded market while Agents appropriate bodies right and left . They force down a dark alley . He kicks in a door and rushes through an apartment complex where the appropriate more bodies , including that of a sweet little old lady who throws a knife at as . leaps down into a pile of garbage with the in hot pursuit . On the the have arrived . They begin to tear the ship apart . In the , arrives back at the O ' the . tells him to go to room 303 . The are literally at his heels . The breach the hull of the ship . They are inside . Trinity , standing next to 's body in the chair , begs him to hurry . Neo reaches room 303 and enters . He 's immediately shot , point blank in the gut , by . empties his magazine into 's body . slumps to the floor , dead . On the ship 's vital signs drop to nothing . " It ca n't be , " says . instructs the others to check . " He 's gone , " one replies . " Good - bye , , " says . The ' lasers are beginning to cut through the major parts of the hovercraft . Trinity leans over his dead body . , " she says , " I 'm not afraid anymore . The told me that I would fall in love and that that man ... the man that I loved would be the One . So you see , you ca n't be dead . You ca n't be ... because I love you . You hear me ? I love you . " She kisses him . In the chair suddenly breathes . In the , opens his eyes . " Now get up , " orders . The hear rise behind them and they open fire . " No , " says calmly , raising his hands . He stops their bullets in mid - air . They drop harmlessly to the floor . "What 's happening ? " asks . " He is the One , " says . Back in the , can see things for what they really are , green cascading code . is furious . He runs to and attacks him . blocks 's blows effortlessly before he sends flying with one well - placed kick . Neo then leaps into 's body and appropriates him . 's shell explodes in a sea of code and is all that is left , the walls buckling in waves as they did when the helicopter crashed . and look at one another and run away . The are now fully in the ship . They are right above and . Back in the sprints to the ringing phone in the room . has no choice but to engage the . He does and the fall inert to the floor . has made it back . He kisses . The screen is black . A command prompt appears : " Call trans opt : received . 9 - 18 - 99 14:32:21 REC : ; " then " anomaly " " Trace program : running " As the grid of numbers appears again a warning appears " . " Over it all is 's voice:"I know you 're out there . I can feel you now . I know that you 're afraid ... you 're afraid of us . You 're afraid of change . I do n't know the future . I did n't come here to tell you how this is going to end . I came here to tell you how it 's going to begin . I 'm going to hang up this phone , and then I 'm going to show these people what you do n't want them to see . I 'm going to show them a world without you . A world without rules and controls , without borders or boundaries . A world where anything is possible . Where we go from there is a choice I leave to you . "In the world , hangs up the phone . He looks at the mindless masses around him , puts on his glasses and then looks up . From high above the city we see him take flight . The story is picked up in The matrix reloaded ( 2003 ) , the second of three movies.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The film opens with three men driving in their car late at night on a highway . In the car are ( ) , ( ) and ( ) . and are asleep when hears a loud thumping noise . Trying to figure out the source of the sound , suddenly realizes they need to stop and check the trunk . When they open it , we see a beaten man wrapped in several bloody tablecloths . An enraged stabs the man several times with a kitchen knife and shoots him four times with a revolver . slams the trunk lid shut and we hear a voiceover ( ) say " As far back as I can remember , I always wanted to be a gangster . now go back several decades , to see the events that will lead up to this scene . In the 1950s , young idolizes the Lucchese crime family gangsters in his blue - collar , predominantly Italian neighborhood in , , and in 1955 quits school and goes to work for them . The local mob capo , ( ) ( based on the actual Lucchese mobster ) and 's close associate ( ) ( based on ) help cultivate 's criminal career . is teamed up with the young and the two sell cartons of cigarettes , given to them by , to employees of a local factory , a crossing guard and some cops . While selling them , two detectives show up and confiscate the money and the load , arresting . Tommy slinks away to tell , 's brother . goes to court and is given a slap on the wrist . gives him a substantial reward for his silence ( calls it a " graduation gift " ) and tells him he did well despite " getting pinched " : revealed no names to the police and learned the two most important things in their line of work : " Never rat on your friends and always keep your mouth shut . " The rest of the gang greets with joyful acceptance . As adults , and ( ) conspire with to steal much of the billions of dollars of cargo passing through . They help out in a key heist , stealing over half a million dollars from the cargo terminal . The robbery helps gain more of 's trust , to whom gives a sizable cut of the haul . However , because is half - Irish , he knows he can never become a " made man " , a full - fledged member of the crime family . Nor can , who is also Irish . Over the years , 's friends become increasingly daring and dangerous . loves hijacking trucks , and has an explosive temper and a psychotic need to prove himself through violence . At one point , he humiliates an innocent and unarmed young waiter " " ( ) , asking to dance The , then shooting him in the foot . A few nights later , when stands up to an extremely intoxicated , ( egged on by ) suddenly draws his gun and shoots in the chest , killing him instantly . is angry with for shooting but is completely indifferent , callously asking where he can find a shovel to bury the dead man . also meets and falls in love with ( ) , a no - nonsense young Jewish woman ; they go to the club two to three times a week ( and the site of a famous continuous shot ) . feels uneasy with her boyfriend 's career , but is also " turned on " by it , especially when viciously whips her neighbor for trying to force himself on her and gives her the bloody pistol to hide . and eventually marry ( which involves convincing 's parents that is half - Jewish).In 1970 , ( aided by ) brutally murders ( ) , a made man in the competing crime family , over a simple insult throws at . The murder is a major offense that could get them all killed by the if discovered . After stopping at 's mother 's place for a late - night meal ( and also to pick up a shovel ) , , and bury ' corpse in an abandoned field , bringing us back to the car trunk scene from the start of the movie . When they discover six months later that the land has been sold , they are forced to exhume , move , and rebury the badly decomposed body , a task that makes physically sick and that and consider another simple chore . 's marriage deteriorates when finds he has a mistress , ( ) . confronts a sleeping with a gun as he wakes up . As soon as she lowers the gun , subdues her and screams that he has enough on his mind having to worry about being " whacked on the street " without waking up with a gun in the face . is visited at 's apartment by and , who tell him that his philandering is bad for business . Paulie promises that he 'll convince that is worth taking back and that will return to his home in a few days . In the meantime , will go with to to find a deadbeat who owes money . After beating and dangling the debt - ridden gambler over a lion cage at the in , and are caught and sent to prison for four years because the guy 's sister was a typist for the . There , deals drugs to the other prisoners to keep afloat and to support his family , and , when he returns to them , he has a lucrative drug connection in . warns against dealing drugs , since mob bosses can get hefty prison sentences if their men are running drugs behind their back . ignores 's order and involves and ( as well as and his new mistress , ( ) in an elaborate cocaine smuggling operation . About the same time , 1978 , and friends plan and successfully carry out a record $ 6,000,000 offscreen heist from the cargo terminal at . Soon after the heist , grows increasingly paranoid when some of his associates foolishly flaunt their gains in plain sight , possibly drawing police attention , and begins having them murdered . Worse , after promising to welcome into the Lucchese family as a " made man , " the elder members of the family coldly shoot him in the head in retaliation for ' death and his reckless behavior . The murder upsets and especially , who are both expected to simply accept it and move on . In an extended , virtuoso sequence titled " , , 1980 , " all of the different paths of 's complicated career collide : he must coordinate a major cocaine shipment ; bring a small cache of pistols to ( he refuses to take them off 's hands ) ; cook a large meal for his family ; placate his mistress , who processes the cocaine he sells ; cope with his clueless babysitter / drug courier , ; avoid federal authorities who , unknown to him , have had him under surveillance for several months ; and satisfy his sleazy drug connection customers , all the while a nervous wreck from lack of sleep and snorting too much of his own product . Lois demands that take her home so she can get her lucky hat , which she wo n't fly without . and are arrested by the police as he backs out of his driveway . When and are booked , along with , the police bring in loads of coke - encrusted equipment from 's apartment . bails her husband out of jail , after destroying all of the cocaine that was hidden in the house and getting her mother to put their house up as collateral for bail money . and his family are left penniless and the couple break down together when admits she destroyed the $ 60,000 in had been planning to ship when he was busted . After 's arrest , and the rest of the mob abandon him . meets a final time with who chastises him for lying about his drug dealing . gives him a few thousand dollars and turns his back on him . meets with to tell him that has sobered up and also that has n't been revealing any vital information about or his other mob compatriots . Before leaves , tells her to take a look at some stolen dresses in one of his shopfronts . becomes scared when she sees two shady - looking workers . 's message to and is clear : they can be ignominiously eliminated if they talk about their connections . Convinced that he and his family are marked for death , decides to become an informant for the . He and his family enter the federal , disappearing into anonymity to save their lives , but not before he testifies against and in court . He is now an " average nobody " and tells us " I get to live the rest of my life like a schnook . " The movie 's quick final shot is of firing a pistol directly into the camera , a tribute to the final shot of The , hinting that will never fully leave a life of crime . The film closes with a few title cards ( over 's version of " My Way " ) showing what became of , ( ) and ( ) . 's marriage to ended in separation with her getting custody of their children , and and will spend practically the rest of their lives in prison . died in in prison in 1988 . 's title card explains that he was eligible for parole in 2004 , though he died of lung cancer in 1996 while still > 

 < synopsis > In 1963 , ( ) , a criminal who has been sentenced to a fairly short prison term , decides to have himself declared insane so he 'll be transferred to a mental institution , where he expects to serve the rest of his term free of prison labor and in ( comparative ) comfort and luxury . His ward in the mental institution is run by an unyielding tyrant , ( ) , who has cowed the patients ( most of whom are " voluntary " or there by choice ) into dejected institutionalized submission . becomes ensnared in a number of power games with for the hearts and minds of the patients . All the time , however , the question is just how sane any of the players in the ward actually are and whether they really belong there . Throughout his stay at the hospital , forms friendships with his fellow patients but the bonds are deepest with two in particular : ( ) , a suicidal , stuttering manchild whom has humiliated and dominated into a quivering mess ; and " " ( ) , a 6'5 " muscular who has schizophrenia . Recognized by the patients in the ward as deaf , and unable to speak , they ignore him but also respect him for his enormous size . In the former , sees a younger brother figure whom he wants to teach to have fun , while the latter is his only real confidant , as they both understand what it is like to be treated into submission . initially insults when he enters the ward , but attempts to use his size as an advantage ( for example , in playing basketball , for which his height is favorable ) . When sees how submissive the patients are under 's tyrannical control , he resolves to antagonize her and undermine her authority as much as possible . At a counseling session , proposes that the ward 's work schedule be altered so that the patients can watch the on television . When the 1st meeting comes to a halt under 's authority , takes wagers on whether he can lift the ward 's marble water - treatment control panel and throw it through a window to escape and watch the at a bar . He naturally fails , but puts forth an extreme effort . The next discussion over changing the work detail quickly becomes a battle of wills when Ratched announces that a majority vote will be acceptable . However , Ratched , upon realizing that the vote may go 's way , deftly alters the rules , stating that votes must be taken from the and patients . When the vote does n't favor , he begins to imagine the game is on TV and rallies most of the other patients behind him , causing a major ruckus . leads the patients in a basketball game against the ward 's orderlies . proves to be an effective player , scoring several baskets . While the orderlies claim that the patients are cheating , ignores their objections . While the patients later relax in the hospital pool , finds out , from an orderly , that he wo n't be released at the end of his prison sentence , but will remain in the hospital for as long as the board and deem necessary . Another counseling session ensues and , very upset at the orderly 's revelation , finds out that he 's been listed as a " committed " patient and will only be released when Ratched permits it , a highly unlikely scenario . also discovers that many of the patients in the ward are there voluntarily : they can leave any time they wish but due to 's dominance , they are afraid to take the chance . seems particularly upset that a young man like remains on the ward voluntarily when he could be free and maybe enjoying his youth . The session quickly erupts in violence however , when the subject of 's cigarette rationing is addressed by an upset patient named . Nearly all the patients who play cards have lost money to after he introduces them to , prompting Ratched to ration their cigarettes . When is burned by a lit cigarette and reacts loudly and violently and is dragged away , Ratched tries to restore order . suddenly becomes confrontational as well and a fight breaks out with the orderlies and , ( who 'd pulled one of the orderlies off ) and are sent to a detention area where electro - convulsive therapy is conducted on disruptive patients . is sent first to undergo , while and wait on the bench . In the few moments they have alone , offers a piece of gum , and verbally thanks him . A surprised realizes that can speak and hear him and has feigned his illness the whole time . McMurphy resolves to allow in on his escape plan because of his hidden wisdom . Ending this scene , a more defiant emerges from the detention area to an awaiting . appears submissive , claiming he 'll happily join the group again . Closer to , fed up with 's oppressive methods , sneaks into the nurse 's station at night and calls his girlfriend , , to bring booze and assist in his escape . She brings a girlfriend , and both enter the ward when convinces the ward 's night attendant , , to open one of the ward 's secured windows . The patients drink heavily , while flirts with 's girlfriend . The party becomes very loud , drawing the attention of 's supervisor . hides them all in 's office until he 's able to convince the supervisor that only is hiding in the office . The party goes on . Later in the evening , when and the Chief plan to finally leave , , upset at 's departure , hints to that he wants a date with . and are given a private room and boosts 's confidence & allows him to have sex with her . , however , while waiting ( believing the encounter will be quick ) , falls asleep with the rest of the patients . and the orderlies arrive in the morning to discover the patients asleep and hung over and the ward and her office trashed . Though clearly upset and angry , she calmly commands the orderlies to lock the open window , escort 's friend out of the hospital and conduct a head count . When they discover that one patient , , is missing , Ratched demands the others to reveal his whereabouts . is discovered with , who is immediately led out of the hospital . Ratched demands that Billy tell him who allowed him to have sex with . Billy , his stutter noticeably gone , tells her that did , and that the rest of the ward encouraged him . A passively angry then threatens to tell 's mother , citing her long - time friendship with her . 's stutter returns very quickly and , very upset , begs Ratched not to tell his mother . When she explains that he should have thought of the consequences , he breaks down into tears and is dragged away to 's office , screaming . , still in possession of 's keys , unlocks one of the windows and is about to escape when 's nurse assistant , , screams loudly . McMurphy and everyone else rush to 's office . Having been left alone momentarily , he committed suicide , using a jagged piece of glass to slit his throat . After sees what the ward has done to his friend and hears 's orders for everyone to remain calm and return to their routine , he explodes into a violent rage , viciously strangling . She survives , but is knocked unconscious by one of the orderlies and taken off the ward . For the next few weeks , rumors float around the ward of 's fate . Some believe he 'd escaped , others seem to know he was lobotomized . Late one night , is quietly returned to his bed by orderlies . The sneaks over to 's bed and finds him unresponsive ; he also sees two scars on 's forehead , indicating that he 'd been lobotomized . Unwilling to leave behind , the suffocates his vegetable - like friend with a pillow . He lifts the heavy marble hydrotherapy fountain that was unable to before and , hurling it through a barred window , escapes to Canada.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > In an unidentified city of constant rain and urban decay , ( ) is preparing to retire and leave the horrors of the city . Before he retires , he is partnered with ( ) , a cocky , young and short - tempered cop from , a comparatively small town . He and meet at the scene of a homicide is investigating . Somerset offers to take Mills out for a drink so they can talk and get to know each other but is too eager to get right to work and is unimpressed with 's attempt to mentor him . The two investigate the murder of a morbidly obese man ( ) who was spaghetti until a kick to his stomach burst him open . Somerset investigates the murder while is given the murder case of prominent ( ) , with written in 's blood on the floor . was forced to carve a pound of flesh off of his body , and subsequently bled to death . The police captain gives Somerset an evidence container with three slivers of a plastic - like material found in the stomach of the obese man , which he was forced to consume along with the spaghetti . Going to the victim 's house , finds three groove marks in front of the refrigerator and finds that the plastic - like slivers fit into them perfectly . Knowing the slivers resulted from the refrigerator being moved , looks behind it . He finds the word written behind the fridge in grease , along with a note containing a quote from 's . Somerset theorizes that a serial killer is basing his crimes on the , with five more to go . To give and Somerset a chance to get along with each other , 's wife , ( ) invites Somerset over for dinner . While they are eating , an elevated train passes by on the track nearby , making the building and all its contents and inhabitants tremble : the couple mention that that 's why the realtor was so nervous for them to see the apartment quickly , trying to hide the proximity of the train . After goes to bed , and examine case evidence from the two scenes . They find a picture of 's wife with blood painted around the eyes . Believing that this means she is supposed to spot something about the murder scene that nobody else would , the detectives have a distraught ( ) look at the pictures in a safe house and she notices an abstract painting that is upside down . Brushing powder on the wall behind the painting , finds fingerprints outlining the words " Help Me . running the fingerprints through , the prints are traced a day later to a pedophile named ( ) , who escaped conviction for the rape of a minor due to the efforts of his lawyer , , the victim . and the detectives raid his apartment and find to be the victim , having been bound to his bed for one year to the day , as evidenced by pictures at the scene ; one taken every day from the day he is discovered . Remarkably , he is still alive but suffering from severe physical and mental deterioration . His hand was cut off and pushed onto the wall behind the painting to leave the prints . Mills and ask to interrogate in the hospital , but the doctor says that he 's chewed off his tongue and that " his brain is mush " from the ordeal . That evening , calls Somerset and requests that he meet with her . The next morning , meets in a diner where she tells him how miserable she is in " the city . " At 's urging , reveals the truth of her request to meet : she is pregnant , afraid of raising a child where they now live and afraid of telling . advises her to tell her husband only if she decides to have it , and he sets himself as an example : he insisted his partner have an abortion , that he finally convinced her , and now he is remorseful . Later that day , using a contact in the , gets a library list of people who have borrowed books related to the . The list leads the detectives to a man named , whose apartment they visit soon after . , his face hidden , sees them as he comes home , pulls out a gun and begins shooting . After a short chase , hits with a tire iron , keeps him subdued at gunpoint , but lets him live and suddenly flees . Mills wants to force their way into 's apartment , believing that they have probable cause because shot at them . Somerset tries to talk him down , saying the method they used to find 's apartment was illegal and that would go free if they caught him . Mills kicks the door in anyway . While they search the apartment ( after bribing a resident to claim she had called the detectives about ) they find notebooks of his thoughts , trophies of the crimes and a picture of Mills fighting off , who , at the time , was posing as a press photographer . calls the apartment and congratulates the detectives on them finding him and apologizes for hitting , also telling the young detective that he " admires " him greatly . Their actions , he says , have caused him to change his plans , and he hangs up . They also find a photo of a young woman , a prostitute ( ) , who they believe may be the next victim . A receipt leads them to a leather shop where placed an order for a sexual device . The girl is soon found dead in a room with written on the door . Also found in the room is a visibly shaken man ( ) forced by at gunpoint to wear and use the device , a large strap - on dildo with a blade attachment , to rape and kill the girl . The owner of the place , ( ) can give no clue to the physical aspect or the briefcase used , as every customer used to carry special clothes or equipment into the place . The next morning , a model ( ) is found dead with written on the crime scene . Her nose has been cut off ( " to spite her face " ) upon which gave her the choice of suicide by sleeping pills or calling for help and living scarred . She chose the former , and swallowed the pills . As the detectives return to the police headquarters , walks up to them , his hands bleeding ( he shaved the skin from his fingertips to avoid identification ) and gives himself up . He talks to his lawyer and agrees that if he can take and to two more bodies , he will confess to all the murders . 's lawyer also warns that if and Mills do n't agree , will plead insanity and the last two victims may never be found . Wanting a confession , the detectives agree . Somerset and Mills both have microphones taped to their chests so the rest of the task force can monitor their conversation with . During the prep , tries to tell about a concern he has with , but ca n't bring himself to talk fully about it . As the three travel to the desert outskirts of the city in a car , they are trailed by a police helicopter for security ( flown by and ) . explains his rationale behind the murders as a way of showing people the truly evil nature of the world , as well as his desire to punish the wicked . He goes on to say he will be remembered and admired for what he has done , having been " chosen " to do so . As speaks , the disgusted is driven to rage , and screams at while remains calm , but plainly worried . Once they reach the outskirts , directs them to a specific spot near some power cable towers . The detectives walk out to an open spot . After a few moments , a van appears and stops it several hundred yards away , leaving Mills behind to cover . The driver ( ) claims someone paid him $ 500 to deliver a box to Mills at this place at exactly 7 o'clock . As opens the box , he recoils in horror from what he sees inside . As he races back to Mills and desperately yells for him to throw his gun away , states to that he admires 's life , to the point of being envious of his wife and the love they share . He goes further , saying he visited ' home and that he tried to " play husband " with that day but it did n't work out and he took a souvenir instead : " her pretty head . " It was 's plan that Mills will kill him , as himself was guilty of , jealous of 's simpler life . He also reveals to that was pregnant , and that she begged to be kept alive for the child 's sake . Mills , despite the pleading of , is so devastated by his wife 's death and the knowledge that she was pregnant , that he shoots in the head , closing his eyes to receive his punishment . Mills shoots 's body five more times . In killing in vengeance , comes to embody the sin of , completing 's " masterpiece . " Somerset can only stand by , helpless to do anything . After a catatonic is taken away , their captain tells Somerset that they 'll " take care of , " knowing the jury will condemn him . Somerset answers , " Whatever he needs " . He also tells his captain that he will be " around ; " implying that he will be staying on the force . As the camera pans out from the desert , the movie ends with quoting : " ' The world is a fine place , and worth fighting for . ' I agree with the second part . "</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > A gang of marauding bandits approaches a mountain village . The bandit chief recognizes they have ransacked this village before , and decides it is best that they spare it until the barley is harvested in several months . One of the villagers happens to overhear the discussion . When he returns home with the ominous news , the despairing villagers are divided about whether to surrender their harvest or fight back against the bandits . In turmoil , they go to the village elder , who declares that they should fight , by hiring samurai to help defend the village . Some of the villagers are troubled by this suggestion , knowing that samurai are expensive to enlist and known to lust after young farm women , but realize they have no choice . Recognizing that the impoverished villagers have nothing to offer any prospective samurai except food , the village elder tells them to " find hungry samurai . "The men go into the city , but initially are unsuccessful , being turned away by every samurai they ask sometimes rudely because they can not offer pay other than three meals a day . Just as all seems lost , they happen to witness an aging samurai , , execute a cunning and dramatic rescue of a young boy taken hostage by a thief . As walks towards town a young samurai , , asks to become his acolyte . insists that he walk with him as a friend . Then the farmers ask to help defend their village ; to their great joy , he accepts . , with 's assistance , then recruits four more masterless samurai ( ) from the city , one by one , each with distinctive skills and personality traits . Although had initially decided that seven samurai would be necessary , he plans to leave for the village with only the four that he has chosen because time is running short . The villagers beg him to take also and , with some prodding by the others , he agrees . A clownish ersatz samurai named , whom had rejected for the mission , follows them to the village at a distance , ignoring their protestations and attempts to drive him away . When the samurai arrive at the village , the villagers cower in their homes in fear , hoping to protect their daughters and themselves from these supposedly dangerous warriors . The samurai are insulted not to be greeted warmly , considering that they have offered to defend the village for almost no reward , and seek an explanation from the village elder . Suddenly , an alarm is raised ; the villagers , fearing that the bandits have returned , rush from their hiding places begging to be defended by the newly - arrived samurai . It turns out that , until this point merely a tag - along , has raised a false alarm . He rebukes the panicked villagers for running to the samurai for aid after first failing to welcome them to the village . It is here that demonstrates that there exists a certain intelligence behind his boorish demeanour . The six samurai symbolically accept him as belonging with them , truly completing the group of wanderers as the " seven samurai . "As they prepare for the siege , the villagers and their hired warriors slowly come to trust each other . However , when the samurai discover that the villagers have murdered and robbed fleeing samurai in the past , they are shocked and angry , and , the most professional and calm of the samurai , even comments that he would like to kill everyone in the village . The always clownish passionately castigates the other samurai for ignoring the hardships that the farmers face in order to survive and make a living despite the intimidation and harassment from the warrior class , in the process revealing his origins to , who suddenly perceives that is himself a farmer 's son . " But who made them like this ? " he asks . " You did ! " The anger the samurai had felt turns to shame , and when the village elder , alerted by the clamor that this revelation instigates , asks if anything is the matter , humbly responds that there is not . The samurai continue their preparations without any animosity , and soon afterward show compassion toward the farmers when they share their rice with an old woman who , her family having been killed by bandits , cries out that she merely wants to die . The preparations for the defense of the village continue apace , including the construction of fortifications and the training of the farmers for battle . , the youngest samurai , begins a love affair with , the daughter of one of the villagers . had been forced to masquerade as a boy by her father who hoped the deception would protect her from the supposedly lustful samurai warriors . As the time for the raid approaches , two bandit scouts are killed , and one is captured and reveals the location of the bandit camp . Three of the samurai , along with a guide from the village , decide to carry out a pre - emptive strike . Many bandits are killed , but one of the samurai , , suffers a fatal sword wound when his villager friend lost emotion control upon seeing his imprisoned wife commit suicide . When the bandits arrive in force soon after this raid , they are confounded by the fortifications put in place by the samurai , and several are killed attempting to scale the barricades or cross moats . However , the bandits have a superior number of trained fighters , and possess three muskets , and are thus able to hold their own . decides to conduct a raid on his own to retrieve one of the muskets and returns with one several hours later . , jealous of the praise and respect earns , particularly from , later abandons his post to retrieve another musket , leaving his contingent of farmers in charge . Although he succeeds , the bandits attack the post , overwhelming and killing many of the farmers . is forced to provide reinforcements from the main post to drive the bandits out , leaving it undermanned when the bandit leader charges this position . Although they are driven off , is shot and killed and it is revealed that , 's friend , was killed at his post . Apart from defense , the initial strategy of the samurai is to allow the bandits to enter a gap in the fortifications one at a time through the use of a closing " wall " of spears , and to then kill the lone enemy . This is repeated several times with success , although more than one bandit manages to enter the village several times . On the second night , decides that the villagers will soon become too exhausted to fight and instructs them to prepare for a final , decisive battle . During the night , 's affair is revealed , and after an initial uproar , his amorous adventures provide comic relief to the embattled militia . When morning breaks and the bandits make their attack , orders his forces to allow all 13 remaining bandits in at once . In the ensuing confrontation , most of the bandits are easily killed , but the leader takes refuge in a hut unseen . In what is portrayed as dishonorable act , he shoots in the back from the safety of the hut , killing him . A despondent seeks to avenge his hero , but an enraged bravely ( and blindly ) charges ahead of him , only to be shot in the belly himself . Although mortally wounded , ensures he kills the bandit chief , finally proving his worth as a samurai , before dying . Dazed and exhausted , and sadly observe " we 've survived once again , " while wails over his fallen comrades . The battle is ultimately won for the villagers . The three surviving samurai , , , and , are left to observe the villagers happily planting the next rice crop . The samurai reflect on the relationship between the warrior and farming classes : though they have won the battle for the farmers , they have lost their friends with little to show for it . " Again we are defeated , " muses . " The farmers have won . Not us . " This melancholic observation sheds new light on 's statement at the beginning of the film that he had " never won a battle . " This contrasts with the singing and joy of the villagers , whose figuratively life - sustaining work has prevailed over war and left all warriors as the defeated party.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > This movie is about a divine intervention by a guardian angel , to help a man in distress . It opens with a fanciful depiction of angels in discussing a problem that has come up . They are receiving prayers from mortals , like " Please , , something 's the matter with " . ( ) is about to kill himself , and they need to send an angel down to to stop him . They select ( ) , a somewhat down - on - his - luck angel who has n't earned his wings yet , but who they decide is right for the job . The senior angels promise that will get his wings if he succeeds . The bulk of the movie is a replaying of 's life , by the senior angels and for 's benefit , so that will understand . was a young man , living in a small upstate town , but with big dreams . From an early age , he wanted to get away from , travel the world , and accomplish big things -- planning cities and building huge airfields , skyscrapers , and bridges . The first incident that sees is that , at age 12 , saved his younger brother 's ( ) life in an accident while playing on an ice - covered pond . lost the hearing in his left ear due to being in the icy water . Shortly after that , while working part - time in 's ( ) drug store , he prevents a mistake in a prescription from fatally poisoning someone . Angry at the neglected delivery , , drunk in the sorrow at the recent death of his son , beats until the boy explains the situation . Upon testing the medicine and realizing the boy had averted a horrible mistake , is profoundly remorseful and grateful to , who vows to keep the error to himself . The two little girls in 's life at that point are ( ) and ( ) , who seem to be competing for his notice . 's father ( ) , with a small staff including ( ) , run a small and company that finances mortgages for the people of . They face a difficult battle with the evil , avaricious , and wealthy ( ) . The wheelchair - bound is on the board of directors of the and , holds much of its assets , along with almost everything else in town , charges people exorbitant rent on his own apartments , and would like to put 's company out of business . wants to begin his adventures after going to college . While he has enormous respect for his father and what he is doing to help people , he definitely does not want to follow in his father 's footsteps at the and . But one thing after another thwarts his plans . went to work at the and for a few years after graduating from high school , with the expectation that would take this over when he graduated , and would go on a European tour and then go to college . But his father has a fatal stroke , and has to take over the for a few months , giving up the European tour . Then attempts to liquidate the , the only thing that can stop it is for himself to take it over . So he gives up college , and gives his college money to . The plan at that point was that , after graduates , he will take over the , and will go to college . But returns from college having married , and 's father has offered him a job in upstate . Although vows to turn it down for 's sake , can not bear to cost his brother the opportunity , so he has no choice but to stay with the B&L.George marries after a difficult introduction -- he mistakenly thinks is in love with his lifelong rival ( ) . They are about to go on their honeymoon with $ 2000 they have saved up . But a banking crisis occurs . Potter has taken over the bank that guarantees the 's loans , and has called in the loans . The customers are in a panic and are tempted to go over to 's bank . The only way can save the situation is to provide for the customers ' needs out of his honeymoon money . Their friends ( ) the and ( ) the policeman arrange for them to have a cut - rate honeymoon at their house . They serenade the newlyweds from outside in the rain . The continues to provide affordable housing for the people of , creating a whole subdivision " " . This includes the home of ( ) , the local tavern keeper , and his family . and his wife come by to offer that and take a vacation with them in , but they ca n't get away even for that . Potter is disturbed that 's is taking customers away from his own apartment business , and attempts to bribe into working for him instead , offering a huge salary and extensive travel . Tempting as that is , is repelled by everything stands for , and declines . So stays with his wife and four children in , never getting to leave . comes and goes , and serves ( is exempt because of his ear ) and heroically saves an entire transport ship by shooting down two attacking airplanes . He is awarded the of at a ceremony in . On the morning before , the day that will have a huge celebration for , a bank examiner arrives to conduct a routine audit . The same day , goes to the bank for a routine deposit of $ 8,000 in cash . Potter happens by , and proudly points out the newspaper with the news about . He accidentally folds the newspaper with the cash envelope in it , and takes it back . Billy then realizes that he has lost the money . Potter , now in another room , sees this , and sneaks out . arrives at the , where , generous as always , is giving some of his own money for her to travel to and start a new life . When tells about the loss , there is an uproar . and search everywhere that the money could possibly have been left . shouts at that this means bankruptcy , scandal and prison , and that he , , is n't the one who will go to prison . goes home in an incredibly foul mood , where his family are preparing for a party that evening . is extremely bitter and nasty , and verbally abuses everyone , saying at one point " Why do we have to have all these kids ? " The whole family are alarmed at his behavior . He learns that their youngest daughter " " ( ) is in bed with a cold . She apparently caught it walking home from school , having not buttoned her coat because she did n't want to harm a rose that she had been given . goes up to see her . While handling the rose , some petals fall off . puts them in his watch pocket . 's teacher , , phones to ask about . gives her a brutal tongue - lashing over her carelessness . When gets on the line , abuses and threatens him . Then starts kicking and throwing things . The children are in tears . refuses to talk about what 's wrong or what is bothering him and storms out of the house . phones to find out what 's wrong . The children ask whether they should pray for their father , and says yes . While word spreads of the calamity , goes to see to beg for a loan of $ 8,000 . is completely unsympathetic and sarcastic . He suggests that has been cooking the books , playing the market with company money , or perhaps paying off a woman , pointing out that he is known to have been giving money to . Potter asks about collateral . All has is a $ 15,000 life insurance policy , but with only $ 500 equity . says " You 're worth more dead than alive . "George goes to 's tavern and starts drinking , and then praying for divine guidance . His friends , including the kind and gentle bartender ( ) , notice and try to help . mentions 's name out loud , and ( ) , the husband of the teacher that insulted for no reason over the telephone earlier , sitting nearby , hears it . He punches , causing a bloody lip . leaves , though his friends urge him to stay and rest . drives his car toward a bridge . Because of the snowy weather , he accidentally drives it into a tree . The homeowner comes out and upbraids him for harming the tree . just keeps walking , out onto the bridge , to kill himself . Just as is about to jump into the frigid river and drown , comes down to ; his moment has come . He knows well enough to know that if he , , jumps into the river , will rescue him . He does so , and jumps in and rescues him as predicted . They go to the toll - taker 's shack to dry their clothes . Clarence explains all -- that he is an angel , " , second class " , sent to save from committing suicide . To 's astonishment , knows the whole story of his life . is disbelieving and cynical about the whole thing , mentioning that it is not surprising that he got only a second - class angel , one without wings . He resists 's entreaties , believing that he must have consumed tainted liquor . He finally says " I wish I 'd never been born . " Clarence formulates his plan , and , after a little prayerful communication with the senior angels , says " You 've got your wish . You 've never been born . "Things change immediately . In the alternate universe it is n't snowing . notices that he can hear through his left ear , and his lip is n't bleeding . Clarence points out that many things will be different now . As and walk back toward town , they pass the tree that had hit with his car . The car is gone , and there is no gash in the tree . The homeowner stops by , and asks about the car and the damage to the tree . The homeowner knows nothing about this . He says " You had me worried . One of the oldest trees in . " is confused , and tries to correct the man , but the man angrily tells that the town is called . and walk off . They continue into town . 's tavern has become a sleazy dive , and is nowhere to be found . It is now owned by the bartender , but who is now very nasty and insulting . and sit down at the bar . Clarence 's polite speech and demeanor immediately displease . knows , but does not know . When a cash register rings , points out that , whenever that happens , it means an angel has earned his wings . An elderly , now a homeless derelict , comes in , and tells him to leave . speaks to , but does n't recognize him . When asks about the guy , says that spent 20 years in prison for poisoning some child in a manslaughter charge , and that if this stranger knows , he must be a convict also . has and thrown out of the tavern , and then derisively makes the cash register ring , saying that he is giving out angel wings . In front of the tavern , is seriously disturbed by what is going on when he sees the sign for ' 's ' in place of 's name . Clarence explains once again that does n't exist from that wish he made that he was never born . brings up the issue that if he was never born and is alive and interacting with people ... then who is he ? Clarence replies that is a person with no identity in this alternate reality . checks his pockets for his wallet , other identification , or his life insurance policy . Clarence points out that they do not exist . Finally , checks his watch pocket . Clarence says " They 're not there either . "\\n"What ? " asks.\\n"Zuzu 's petals . You 've been given a great gift , . The chance to see what the world would be like without you . "Continuing to be in denial of what is going on , continues to walk downtown without . has become , and it is a dreary , brutish , and perverse place , full of bars and sleazy nightclubs . The movie theater , the department store , and the , are long gone . Police are everywhere , dealing with disorders . sees the police arrest and take her away from a brothel which is the former He hails 's taxi cab and asks to be taken home . has no idea who he is or where he lives . He gives the address , and tells him that that is an abandoned house , but he will take him there anyway . When asks about his life , tells that his wife left him three years ago , and that he now lives alone in a place called 's . He visually signals for the policeman to follow them . As searches the house calling out for his family , appears . attempts to arrest them , but Clarence intervenes and then vanishes , allowing to escape . then goes to his mother 's house , which has become a broken - down boarding house called " 's " . She opens the front door , but she does not recognize him and tells him to leave . mentions , and she says that he has been in an insane asylum since the went out of business many years ago . Still in denial of what is happening , then goes with to 's house in . There is no such place -- it is a wasteland with a cemetery . Clarence points out the grave of . Clarence says " Your brother broke through the ice and was drowned at the age of nine . ""That 's a lie ! went to war . He got the of . He saved the lives of every man on that transport . " says . "Every man on that transport died . was n't there to save them , because you were n't there to save . You see , , you really had a wonderful life . Do n't you see what a mistake it would be to throw it away?"George then asks to see . says that she never married , and works at the library . goes there . She does n't recognize him . He tries to embrace her ; she screams and runs into a nightclub . He runs after her , but is confronted by a crowd made of many he knows , but they of course have no recognition of this wild man they have never met before in this reality . Finally aware of what is happening , calls out for as the police intervene . slugs and runs away . shoots at him but misses , then pursues in his squad car . runs to the bridge where he had been about to jump , and calls out " Help me Clarence , please ! Please ! I want to live again ! " He piteously calls to bring him back . With that plea , the alternate universe suddenly ends . It 's snowing once again . arrives in his police car , and calls out to that he 's been looking for him , since seeing his car plowed into the tree . He also points out that 's lip is bleeding . is delighted to hear this , and to know that knows him . He checks his watch pocket ; the rose petals are there!George is ecstatic . He runs into town , which is once again , and has all its familiar institutions , which he greets with unbounded joy . He even wishes a , who sarcastically wishes him a in jail considering the authorities are waiting for him at home . arrives home , knowing that he will likely be arrested for bank fraud . The officials are there , ready to arrest him . However , stuns them by his delight at his arrest warrant , especially since his children are there also , and all have a joyful reunion . comes home , along with many people led by . Contrary to 's claim that they would hate him for losing their money , it turned out that when word got around that was in financial trouble , the townspeople that he had been so generous to had contributed whatever they could provide . Dozens of people arrive , with a whole laundry basket full of money , jewelry , and other valuables . A telegram arrives from in , saying that he had been contacted by about the situation , and would advance up to $ 25,000 to cover the debt on the At this , the , both moved by this show of public support and knowing that the financial deficit will be compensated , moves up to contribute and the attending police officer tears up the arrest warrant with a smile . Suddenly , arrives from , having immediately left his award banquet upon hearing that his brother needed his support , and toasts " To my big brother . The richest man in town . "In the last scene , as the whole crowd sings " the " and then " " finds a copy of the ' The of ' with a brief handwritten note on the inner pages in his inside coat pocket . It reads , " . Remember no man is a failure who has friends . Thanks for the wings ! Love , . " When asks who is , , well aware she would never believe the whole story , just says it is a present from a very dear friend . At that moment , a bell on the tree rings . says " Look , daddy . Teacher says , every time a bell rings , an angel gets his wings . " says " That 's right . That 's right . " And , glancing heavenward , " , . > 

 < synopsis > Promising student is pulled from her training at the at , by of the 's , who tasks her with presenting a questionnaire to the notorious , a brilliant forensic psychiatrist and incarcerated cannibalistic serial murderer . After learning the assignment relates to the pursuit of vicious serial killer , Starling travels to the for the and is led by to , a sophisticated , cultured man restrained behind thick glass panels and windowless stone walls . Although initially pleasant and courteous , grows impatient with 's attempts at " dissecting " him and viciously rebuffs her . As Starling departs , another patient flings fresh semen onto her face , enraging who calls Starling back and offers a riddle containing information about a former patient . The solved riddle leads to a rent - a - storage lot where the severed head of is found . Starling returns to , who links to and who offers to help profile if he is transferred to a facility far from the venomous , careerist . Hours and miles away , abducts , the daughter of . Starling is pulled from and accompanies to , where the body of 's most recently - discovered victim resides . In the plane taking them to the town , asks Starling what she sees in the file on . She says that is a male , definitely white and that he 's getting better at his work since he 's " developed a taste for it " . At the coroner 's office , Starling helps perform the autopsy and extracts the of a - head from the victim 's throat . When the victim is turned over for further examination , they find that two large , diamond - shaped strips of flesh have been flayed from her body . Having already spoken to about how flays his victims , this detail is recorded by . At , as news of 's abduction sweeps the country , authorizes Starling to offer a fake deal promising a prison transfer if he provides information that helps profile and rescue . Instead , begins a game of " quid pro quo " with Starling , offering comprehensive clues and insights about in exchange for events from 's traumatic childhood . Unaware to both and , tapes the conversation and after revealing 's deal as a sham , offers to transfer in exchange for a deal of his own making , one that will make out as a hero for identifying and tracking down . agrees and following a flight to reveals 's real name , physical description and past address to and her entourage of agents and officials . He also insults openly , asking about her breastfeeding of her daughter . orders Lecter back to when he spills 's identity information . As the manhunt begins , Starling travels to 's special cell in a local courthouse , where she confronts him about the false information he gave the . refuses 's pleas and demands she finish her story surrounding her worst childhood memory . After recounting her arrival at a relative 's farm , the horror of discovering their lamb slaughterhouse and her fruitless attempts at rescuing the lambs -- they screamed as they were being slaughtered , a memory that has haunted Starling her whole life -- rebuffs her , leaving her with her case file before she is escorted out of the building by security guards . As she reaches for the file , he touches one of her fingers . Later that evening , escapes from his cell , his two minders distracted by having to move his sketches and tricking them into approaching him too closely . The local police storm the floor , discovering one guard barely alive and the other disemboweled and strung up on the bars of 's cage like an angel . Paramedics transport the survivor to an ambulance and speed off while a team searches the building for . As the team discover a body on top of the elevator car , the survivor in the ambulance peels off his own face , revealing in , who kills the paramedics and escapes to the airport . After being notified of 's escape , Starling pores over her case file , analyzing 's annotations before realizing that the first victim , , knew in real life before he killed her . Starling travels to 's hometown and discovers that was a tailor and has dresses with templates identical to the patches of skin removed from 's victims . Realizing that is a tailor fashioning a " woman suit " of real skin , she telephones , who is already on the way to make an arrest , having cross - referenced 's notes with and finding a man named . instructs Starling to continue interviewing 's friends while he leads a team to 's business address in , . 's interviews lead to the house of " , " whom Starling soon realizes is actually , and draws her weapon just as disappears into his basement . Starling pursues him in the basement , which consists of several rooms , discovering a screaming in the dry well . The lights in the basement suddenly go out , leaving her in complete darkness . Gumb stalks Starling in the dark with night vision goggles and prepares to shoot her when Starling , hearing the clicks of his drawing back the hammer on his revolver , swivels around and shoots dead . Days later at the graduation party , Starling receives a phone call from , now in the . As assures Starling he has no plans to pursue her , he excuses himself from the phone call , remarking that he 's " having an old friend for dinner " before hanging up and following through the streets of the village.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > An American flag back - lighted by the afternoon sun gently flaps in the breeze . The camera pulls back to reveal the American and on the in the north of . An elderly man ( ) approaches the cemetery and walks among the rows of gravestones , which are mostly marble crosses , with an occasional of marking the grave of a Jewish soldier . He is accompanied by his wife , his daughter and her husband , and three teenage granddaughters . He searches the crosses and stops at a specific one , where he falls to his knees , crying . His family walks up behind him and tries to comforts him . The camera slowly zooms in on his face , stopping at an extreme close up of his eyes . 6 , 1944 , , : On the choppy waters of the , soldiers are headed to in landing vehicles . The captain of one unit , ( ) , tells his men to , upon landing , " clear the murder holes " and check their rifles for sand and water when they exit the boats . 's right hand shakes nervously . The moment the landing ramp at the front of the boat opens , a number of men are immediately struck down by machine gun fire from concrete German bunkers and machine - gun nests built into the cliffs overlooking the beach . To avoid the machine gun fire , other men jump over the gunwales of the landing boats and into the surf . Some drown under the weight of their heavy gear , others are hit by enemy fire underwater . Upon gaining the beach , many take refuge behind the wooden landing craft obstacles and the thin flanks of the steel tank obstacles blocking approaches to the beach , which offer almost no protection from incoming fire and mortar rounds . As crawls up the sand , a mortar shell hits nearby and the blast temporarily stuns him , knocking his helmet off . 's is stunned and his hearing is reduced to a dull , muddled noise . He watches as men around him are hit by bullets or the blast of mortar rounds , or are simply too scared to move . One private looks in the eye and asks him what to do . 's hearing slowly returns and he orders his sergeant , ( ) to move his men up the beach and out of the line of enemy fire . As staggers up the beach , he drags a wounded man . The man is hit by a mortar blast and is killed ; suddenly discovers that he 's been dragging less than half the man 's dismembered remains . The German barrage kills most of the troops and leaves twice as many wounded ; many of the wounded are eviscerated or missing limbs and slowly bleed to death on the beach , despite the efforts of medics to treat them . is left in 's platoon assembles at a sandbar that provides very little cover from the German bombardment . orders his men to use " bangalore " explosives to clear out the barbed wire and mines behind the sandbar for their advance . The men make it to the nearest concrete bunker where a machine gun nest on a nearby cliff keeps them from moving further . After sending a few of his men into the fire zone where they 're cut down immediately , has his sniper , . ( ) , run into the fire zone and take out the men in the machine gun nest with two precise shots . 's efforts are successful and moves his men behind the bunker where a soldier with a flamethrower sets the bunker ablaze . On the beach , one soldier yells to the others to let the German soldiers burn to death as they jump out of the bunker . 's men engage other German soldiers in the trenches behind the bunker , quickly creating an exit route from for the rest of the battalion . also watches as a few men mercilessly execute a few surrendering German and soldiers . . ( ) finds a knife which he gives to his friend , . ( ) ( a ) ; begins to sob . Horvath collects a handful of dirt in a small metal can marked " " and puts it into his haversack alongside cans marked " " and " " . Horvath comments to that the beach commands " quite a view " ; it is covered with the bodies of thousands of dead and wounded American soldiers . On the backpack of one of them is the name " . At the in the , rows of secretaries are typing death notices to be sent to the families of the men killed in various battles around the world . One of the women typing discovers three letters for three men from the same family . The three men are all brothers from the Ryan family of and their mother will receive all three letters at the same time . The fourth and youngest son of , , is part of the , dropped into ahead of the beach invasion and his whereabouts are unknown . The letters are brought to the attention of ( ) who , after reading a poignant letter sent by to a family under similar circumstances during the , orders his officers to find and have him brought home immediately . Back in , three days after - , meets with his commanding officer and reports on a difficult mission that cost the lives of many of his men . ( ) gives him new orders ; is tasked with taking a squad into to find . and bring him back . gathers what men he can and finds ( Davies ) in the camp press box to accompany the squad as a translator - speaks fluent and German , to replace his previous interpreter . The squad sets out in the French countryside . tries to talk to and but , because he 's the " new guy " in the squad , finds them unfriendly and even insulting , despite his higher rank . The squad 's medic , ( ) , asks about a book he plans to write about the bonds of friendship among soldiers ( which immediately mocks ) . ( ) , a hotheaded private from , questions the mission , wanting to know if the effort to find is worth the lives of men who should be fighting more important battles to liberate and . himself is also skeptical about the mission but understands that his current orders are more important and encourages his squad to discuss the mission . The squad arrives in a small French village where units are currently at a standstill with the German forces they 're fighting . asks the nearest sergeant if is among his unit , but he 's not . In an attempt to get information from the unit on the other side of town , they send a runner across the battlefield . The runner is cut down almost immediately . They cross the town via some side roads and come across a French family trying to escape their bombed home , but are trapped in the crossfire . The father insists the squad take his young daughter to safety ; refuses but steps out from cover to take her , against orders . He is shot in the chest by a sniper and falls , still alive , caught in the open . The squad takes cover , unable to pull to safety . quickly identifies the town 's bell tower as the sniper 's likely shooting position . He finds a nearby pile of rubble that he uses for cover to take out the sniper . As the sniper looks for another target among the squad , he sees a moment too late , and is shot through his own scope . Caparzo dies , having bled to death . looks down on his body and harshly tells his men that this is why they follow orders and " do n't take children . " retrieves a blood - stained letter from the body that had been writing to his father . In another part of the village , the squad and the other soldiers sit down inside a bombed building to rest . A sergeant sends one of his men to find their . When the sergeant sits down , he knocks over a weakened brick wall that reveals a squad of German soldiers inside the building . A standoff ensues , with both sides aiming their weapons at each other , and both demanding the other put down their guns . The impasse is unexpectedly ended when the are cut down by machine - gun fire from the unit 's ( ) and the soldier sent to find him . asks the captain if he has a . in his unit . The captain confirms that he does , and ( ) is brought to who tells him his brothers are dead . The man breaks down and asks how they died and tells him they were killed in combat . is incredulous , telling that his brothers are still in grade school . confirms the man 's full name , and learns that he is " " from ; , exasperated , tells he 's sure his brothers are just fine . From another private being treated for a leg wound , also from the , the squad learns that the 's rallying point is nearby and that may have gone there . The squad spends a few hours resting in a church . rewrites the blood - stained letter wanted to send to his father . and talk about how many men has lost under his command . accepts that men die in combat for the greater good . . talks to the captain about a betting pool the men have going where they try to guess 's occupation before the war began . and come to a humorous silent agreement that when the pool is big enough , will tell him the answer . The squad arrives at a rally point near a wrecked troop glider . The rally point is filled with dozens of wounded GIs . Sitting among the men is the pilot of the glider who tells them he does n't know where to find . . The pilot 's glider went down after being towed because steel plates had been welded to its underside to protect a general he was transporting , making the glider too heavy to fly . The glider crashed , killing the general . The squad reflects on the efforts to protect only a single man . The pilot gives a bag full of dog tags taken from dead soldiers . has his men go through them looking for . They do so rather callously while men from units march by . walks over and starts snatching up the tags , muttering that his comrades are acting rather coldly in front of the passing Airborne soldiers . concludes that is n't among them and in a minor fit of desperation , begins to question the passing soldiers , asking if any of them know . He gets lucky with one man who is from 's unit and has lost his hearing from a grenade blast , so he yells his answers . The man tells him that was assigned to a mixed unit that 's guarding a bridge across the in the nearby village of . determines that the bridge is of vital importance to the and the because it will allow either to drive their tank units across the water . The squad sets out again . They spot two dead GIs in a field and confirm that none of them are . and spot a machine gun nest near a partially destroyed radar dish . Though it would be easier , as suggests , to keep their distance from the machine gun and slip quietly around it , resolves to take out the 's position so that the next Allied unit will not be surprised and killed . The squad is opposed to the plan , but he wo n't relent , and gives them their assignments . is instructed to stay behind with their gear . The squad attacks the machine gun emplacement , while watches through one of 's rifle scopes . When the skirmish is over , the men yell frantically for to bring their gear . When reaches them , he sees that has been shot several times in the lower chest and is rapidly bleeding to death . The men frantically try to save his life but dies , saying he wants to go home . One of the ( ) is captured alive and in retribution , the squad rushes around him , beating him . is undecided how to dispose of the German POW , and orders that he dig graves for and the two GIs they saw in the field . When protests that prisoners are n't to be treated like slaves , coldly orders to help the . As the German digs the graves , sits off to one side where he cries , his right hand shaking again . He slowly recovers his composure and returns to the squad . 's squad wants to kill the remaining German , excepting , who has mildly befriended the German while he dug the graves . The German begs for his life , insisting he loves , saying " ! ! " . The men are unmoved and prepare their weapons to kill him when intervenes . He blindfolds the and , to the astonishment of the squad , lets the man walk off , directing to tell him to surrender to the next Allied unit . in particular is offended by 's compassion and threatens to desert , saying that their mission has gotten two of their comrades killed . Horvath orders to fall into formation and threatens to shoot him . The entire squad begins to argue heatedly and suddenly asks the total of the pool on him . reveals that he 's an English composition teacher in a small town . The men stop arguing , completely astonished . says the war has changed him and he 's not sure if his wife will recognize him and if he 'll be able to resume his former life when he returns home . He reasons that if finding and bringing back ensures that he 'll be able to get home sooner , then it 's his job to complete the mission . The squad finishes burying and the other GIs together . The exhausted squad approaches . While crossing a field , they spot a German half - track . orders everyone to take cover while the vehicle passes . The half - track is suddenly hit by bazooka fire . 's squad is momentarily confused , uncertain who is firing , but moves in and kills as they attempt to escape the destroyed vehicle . A small group of American soldiers emerge from their positions in the field and identify themselves as paratroopers from various Airborne units . One of them identifies himself as ( ) .In the ruins of the village of , 's squad learns that and his comrades are guarding one of two remaining bridges across the . Their commanding officer had been killed a few days before . tells that his three brothers are dead and that he 's been given a ticket home . is devastated by the news of his family but refuses to leave , saying that it 's his duty to stay with his unit and defend the bridge until relief arrives . says his mother would understand his desire to remain at the bridge with the " only brothers [ he ] has left . " ca n't change 's mind . and reflect on 's refusal and they decide to stay and help the unit defend the bridge . The half - track they destroyed was part of a German probe to investigate the forces guarding the bridge so the unit knows the will mount a large assault . inventories their few remaining weapons and supplies and outlines a plan to lure German tanks on the main street of , where the rubble from destroyed buildings creates a narrow choke point that will channel the armor and German troops into a bottleneck and allow their unit to flank the . Their plan includes riding out on a German half - track motorcycle to lure the German unit into the bottleneck . suggests they improvise " sticky bombs , " socks stuffed with explosives and coated with grease . They 'll use the sticky bombs to blast the treads off one of the tanks , turning it into a roadblock . is given the job of running ammunition to the two machine gun positions manned by and ( ) . and take position in the church tower to provide sniper cover and for to stand as a lookout , reporting on the German approach . The men wait for the to arrive , listening to " es " by , while interprets -- his new comrades seem more accepting of him and listen intently while he translates , even joking him and recounting their own personal stories . tells that he can remember his brothers but he ca n't see their faces . suggests he " think of a context " , something they 've all done together . tells when he wants to remember his wife , he thinks of her trimming rosebushes . tells the story of how he and his brothers nearly burned down the barn on their farm when they snuck up on their oldest brother , , while he was trying to have sex with a local girl in the hayloft . laughs and stops when he realizes that the incident was the last time they were all together , over two years ago , before any of them had gone to basic training . When asks to tell him about his wife and the rosebushes , politely refuses , saying that memory is for him alone . The squad feels the ground beginning to rumble , indicating that the German column has arrived . signals from the church tower that there are two tanks ( which turn out to be self - propelled guns ) and two I heavy tanks . There are also at least 50 German troops . orders everyone to their positions and rides out to act as " the rabbit " to lure the into town . One of the tanks proceeds down the main street , and one of the soldiers attempts to plant a sticky bomb on the tank . He waits too long and the bomb blows up , killing him . The German troops following the tank are cut down by the soldiers and by mines planted along the sides . Two men plant the bombs on the wheels of the , blasting it 's tread apart , eventually bringing it to a halt . When they advance on the tank to take out it 's crew , they are fired upon by a small German squad with a 20 millimeter flak cannon that brutally takes out several more men . and 's squads open fire and shift positions several times during the battle . Though they take the by surprise , several of the men are killed . is discovered in his perch and is hit by tank fire . and ( ) man a .30 caliber machine gun to cut off any flanking action by the . is killed and then is attacked by a German soldier ( ) who overpowers him in hand - to - hand combat , slowly driving a bayonet into 's chest . Immediately outside the room on the stairs , . sits , frozen with terror , unable to move to rescue . The German soldier kills and marches out , indifferent to the terrified . is able to flank the 20 mm cannon and takes out its operators . . is wounded during this time when he and another soldier corner each other . They each chuck helmets at each other , then shoot each other with their pistols . The German soldier here is killed and is injured . He grabs and retreats when orders everyone to cross the bridge to their " " position , where they 'll make their last stand . The surviving 60 - ton tank follows , unstoppable despite shooting several bazooka rockets at it . is shot in the chest as he pulls back and dies a few minutes later . prepares to destroy the bridge when a shell from the hits the building behind him , blowing the detonator out of his hands . He staggers across the bridge to retrieve it and is shot in the chest by the same German soldier ( ) he 'd set free at the radar station . witnesses the shooting while hiding behind a pile of rubble . falls , unable to continue . He draws his .45 pistol and begins to shoot vainly at the tank , which has begun to cross the bridge . After a few shots , the tank impossibly explodes . A small squadron of fighters suddenly zoom into view , having bombed the tank and several enemy targets . and rush to 's side and call for a medic . , still on the other side of the bridge , is undetected by the enemy squad . He reveals himself and takes the entire squad prisoner . The man who shot recognizes and calls him by name . After a moment 's hesitation , fires his weapon for the first time , killing the man . The soldier 's body thumps to the ground and sharply orders the rest of the prisoners to disperse . As lays dying , tells him that the are " tank busters . " calls them " Angels on our shoulders . " He beckons closer and with his dying breath , tells him " Earn this ... earn it . " In a voiceover , 's voice reads a letter to 's mother , informing her that her son is returning home . He quotes a passage from 's letter about the cost of war . stands looking at 's body . The camera focuses on 's young face as it morphs into in the present . He is standing at 's grave . He tells that he hopes he 's lived up to 's wish and been worthy of all that and his men did for him . He asks his wife to tell him that he 's led a good life and that he 's a good man . The elder ( ) salutes 's grave . An American flag back - lighted by the afternoon sun gently flaps in the > 

 < synopsis > Taking place over the course of over two decades , of tells the story of ( Portuguese for of ) , a lower class quarter west of . The film is told from the viewpoint of a boy named ( in ) who grows up there as a fishmonger 's son , and demonstrates the desperation and violence inherent in the slums . Based on a real story , the movie depicts drug abuse , violent crime , and a boy 's struggle to free himself from the slums ' grasp . The movie begins cinematically depicting chickens being prepared for a meal . A chicken escapes and as an armed gang chases after it bumps into who believes that the gang wants to kill him . The movie then flashes back ten years earlier , to tell the story of how he got himself into that position . Three " hoodlums " , " The " , one being 's brother , , are terrorizing local businesses with armed holdups . In fashion they split part of the loot with the citizens of of and are protected by them . Li'l is a hanger - on who convinces them to hold up a motel and rob its occupants . Li'l ( " " in ) , serving as lookout , fires a warning shot , then proceeds to slaughter the inhabitants . The massacre brings on the attention of the police forcing the three to quit their criminal ways . Each meets an untimely end , except one who decides to join the church . , 's brother , is slain by Li'l after robbing the younger boy and his friend who have been hiding out and committing crimes themselves . The movie fast forwards a number of years . Li'l now calls himself Li'l ( " " in ) , and , along with his childhood friend , he establishes a drug empire by eliminating all of the competition except for a drug dealer named ( " " in ) . Meanwhile , has become a part of the " Groovies " a hippie - like group of youth that enjoy smoking pot . He begins his photography career shooting his friends , especially one girl that he is infatuated with , but who is dating another boy . A relative peace has come over of under the reign of Li'l who plans to eliminate his last rival , , against the judgment of his best friend , who is keeping the peace . At one point , his best friend and partner in crime has decided to become a " playboy " and becomes the " coolest guy in of " . Eventually , along with the girl that he has wooed away from , he decides to leave the criminal life behind to live on a farm . However , he is gunned down at his going away party by former drug dealer , , who is actually aiming for Li'l . was the only thing keeping Li'l from taking over 's business , so now is in danger . Li'l humiliates a peace loving man at the party and afterwards rapes his girlfriend and kills 's uncle and younger brother . turns violent and sides with . After killing one of Li'l 's men , starts a war between the two rival factions that creates a " " of of . Jealous of 's notoriety in the newspapers , Li'l has Rocket take photos of himself and his gang which , unknown to , are taken by a reporter and published in the daily paper . Rocket then mistakenly fears for his life believing that will want to kill him for it . In actuality , Li'l is pleased with his newfound fame . Coming full circle , is startled by 's request that he take a picture of the gang which had been chasing the chicken at the beginning of the film . Before he can , however , a gunfight ensues between the two gangs , but is broken up by the police . is killed by a boy who has infiltrated his gang to avenge his father , who was killed by during a bank robbery . Li'l and are arrested and is taken away to be shown to the press . Li'l is shaken down for money , humiliated and finally released , all of which is secretly photographed by . After the cops leave , the ( a gang of young children who robbed and terrorized the local merchants ) come upon Li'l and shoot and kill him in retribution for him killing one of their gang earlier in the film . Rocket takes pictures of Li'l 's dead body and goes to the newspaper . Rocket is seen in the newspaper office looking at all of his photographs through a magnifying glass , and deciding whether or not to put the pictures of the crooked cops in the newspaper , or the picture of 's dead body . The photos of the cops would make him famous but put him in danger , while the photos of Li'l would guarantee him a job at the paper . He decides to take the safe route and gives the paper the picture of Li'l 's bullet - ridden body , which runs on the front page . The story ends with the walking around the of , making a hit list of the dealers they plan to kill to take over their drug business.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > A group of elderly people are giving interviews about having lived in a climate of crop blight and constant dust reminiscent of The of the 1930 's . The first one seen is an elderly woman stating her father was a farmer , but did not start out that way . The scene changes . We are introduced to a farmer and widower named ( ) . He is a college - educated former test pilot and engineer who was forced to give up his occupation to farm , living in a run down farmhouse , presumably owned by his father in law . They farm corn , with wheat no longer available and okra just now having become extinct due to blight . We see no animal life . It is the 2060 's in eastern . More than half of the world 's population has been decimated from famine and has been reduced to a struggling agrarian society for the past 30 years . Technology has come to a standstill for the past 40 or so years , with automobiles no longer produced and a computer laptop is a luxury item . However on a good note , there are no more wars or militaries in the world anymore . At a certain age , kids are tested to determine what occupations they will have to take to help humanity survive . In school , it is taught that the going to the moon in 1969 was a hoax to drive the into bankruptcy and win the . 's family consists of his 65 - year - old father - in - law , ( - year - old son ( ) , and 10 - year - old daughter ( ) . was born at the end of the 20th or beginning of the 21st century and fondly recalls times when technology was constantly changing and new gadgets being invented . He is a down - to - Earth man who takes care of the household duties and gets along well with . The two of them sit on the porch drinking beer in the evening and philosophize about the condition of the world and how things should be . 's son is a boy of average intelligence already being ruled out to be a farmer by the school administration , since a college education is now something only a very small percentage those will enjoy the privilege of . His daughter is a feisty and highly intelligent girl whom is very close to and who shares his affinity with space and science . She believes her room is haunted by a ghost because books keep falling off her shelves and a lunar ship model was just knocked over . The family lives a pretty simple life and have a rare treat of attending a game of a supposedly major league baseball team at a local ball field similar to what the little league play on today . His father in law is unimpressed at the amateurishness of the players and having only popcorn for refreshments and no hot dogs . An approaching dust cloud interrupts the game reminding them of the grim world they live in , and ends it prematurely . The family makes back to the farmhouse during the dust storm and 's bedroom did not have the window closed and the dust settled into perfect lines on the floor . Cooper spends the entire night studying the lines and thinks the lines are binary code and coordinates for a place he feels the need to find and uses a map . He spends the next day driving to the and his daughter sneaks into the truck to come with him . Soon after arriving at his final destination ( a fenced off gated area ) , is apprehended and tasered into unconsciousness . When wakes up , he is in a room being interrogated by a strange looking robot called . It turns out is in the best - kept secret in the world , a bunker , and meets his old boss from , an named ( ) , plus his beautiful young daughter , ( ) . Nobody is convinced that just stumbled into the place by accident and believes a force brought there . The compound found is actually the remnants of , inhabiting the facility in secret and no longer funded by the government because of the scarcity of resources . There is a space mission leaving soon to go through a wormhole of unknown origin near that will take them to three potentially habitable planets , two of them orbiting a super - massive black hole named ; a large black sphere about the size in diameter of 's sun but which has a solar mass of about 50 million suns . Ten years earlier , 12 individual astronauts were sent out through the wormhole in 12 different ships , but only three ( , , and 's ) activated the thumbs up beacon , all of whom are at three planets . At the moment , has nobody to pilot the spacecraft and at the last minute they want to go , despite his family responsibilities . The bunker itself is actually a centrifuge , which is projected to become something else later on . The mission has two plans : Plan is to get the centrifuge into orbit as a space station and rescue a large number of people ; this requires to solve the equation that will allow the scientists to overcome gravity and get the centrifuge into orbit . Plan is to colonize the most habitable of the three planets along with a bunch of frozen embryos to repopulate the species . assures the is dying and humanity does n't have much longer and that he needs to pilot the craft and explore , lest his family and the rest of the world all die soon . is very reluctant , because he 's barely left 's atmosphere , but Brand reassures the twelve astronauts sent on the mission never even left the simulators beforehand . The next day , and return to the farmhouse , his daughter is extremely upset with him for choosing the mission . That night and are sitting on the porch drinking beer and reminding once again of the futility of staying and the conditions they live in . he 's doing the right thing , but needs to set things right with . The next morning , does his best to comfort a sobbing and promises to come back to her and that they might even be the same age when he returns , giving her a wristwatch to compare time . refuses his assurance and that her bookshelf is communicating with her in to " stay " . Despite her pleas , wo n't back down and one more book falls down before he leaves , but disregards it . Cooper leaves and says goodbye to and and while he 's driving away , storms out the front door wanting to see him one last time , but it 's too late . The space shuttle - craft rockets away from at high speed with , , ( ) , " " ( ) , and the and CASE robots on board . and are two scientists that were in the conference room at during the meeting with . When the spacecraft leaves the atmosphere , everything goes quiet all of a sudden , except the inside . The ring shaped is up ahead and they dock with it , which has all their needs for space travel . The is leaving and they bid farewell to a spinning and have to look forward to the lonely , claustrophobic , and potentially dangerous reality of space and put themselves in a plastic - covered water cryosleep bed for the two - year journey to . makes a trip in 's old 2010 ram truck to deliver the vehicle back to the homestead and give a tape recorded message from to his family . appears hoping her father is home , but angrily storms back into the house . tells about how is making fools out of her teachers , but tells maybe she 'll eventually make a fool out of him . Two years later . The is orbiting and is out of cryosleep , reviewing video messages . His son tells him he 's doing okay and says hi , telling that still refuses to talk to him . The crew come upon the wormhole , which resembles a plasma globe and will provide a quick channel for the crew to reach the three planets in the next galaxy . The crew take off for the rough ride , ( a la 2001 infinity ) and come to their first mission , 's . During the time through the wormhole , reaches out and feels she touched someone 's hand . They find themselves in a region of space around 10 billion light years from planet . They decide to head first to 's planet , intending to stop there only briefly as its close proximity to causes severe gravitational time dilation with each hour spent on the surface costing seven years . , , , and the robot CASE decide to risk themselves and intend to be in and out of there in just minutes to survey while remains on the to study the black hole and get quantum data from it . When they land , all they find is shallow water and wreckage of 's ship , who apparently died and had arrived just an hour or two earlier , even though she sent the thumbs up beacon on 10 years before . The crew think there are mountains in the distance that turn out to be giant tsunami waves . Brand becomes trapped under the wreckage and has to be rescued and carried back by , is drowned , and the ship is flooded and wo n't be able to make it out for another hour , costing them years . Cooper is frustrated at , but forgives her mistake . After the engines are mostly emptied of water , fires them up and just manages to escape the next tidal wave and fly off the surface . Cooper and make it back to the to find an aged and gray in a robe -- 23 years have passed and has spent most of the time waiting with a couple of stretches in cryosleep . It is now about the year 2090 on . They are all beyond crushed , but is relieved to know her father is still alive and well . They are receiving messages from , but unable to transmit out . Cooper reviews all the videos and breaks down looking at 23 years of recorded videos and sees before his very eyes his 17 - year - old son showing a picture of what he believes is the right girl for him . In the next video , ( now played by ) introduces to to his grandson . In the next video , a now weather - beaten and 40 - year - old reveals that died a week ago and is buried next to and that he believes to be missing or dead and needs to let him go . Then afterwards an apparent live recording comes from ( now played by ) . After 25 years of silence , a still stubborn and saddened tells off her father for not fulfilling the possibility of being back because she is now 35 years of age , which is the same age he was when he left . It 's like a knife has been plunged into his heart and he feels he has betrayed her badly and has no way to communicate back with her . On , stops recording the video . She is now working for and living in the , who is now about 90 - years - old and confined to a wheelchair . Brand is still trying to solve the incomplete gravity equation to get A rolling and is reassuring that the crew of the are receiving their recorded messages , but the crew ca n't transmit out . Now that the crew have recovered emotionally from 's video , they debate whether to visit 's planet or 's planet , because they only have enough fuel to visit one of them before they head back to . Brand wants to visit 's because his planet appears to be the better prospect , but wants to visit 's because he 's still transmitting his beacon . On , returns to the old homestead with her brother , a farmer . He has just torched a third of his crop because of blight , which is spreading . He now has his old neighbor 's crop to cultivate since the neighbor moved or died . They believe the farm will soon produce nothing . She has dinner of corn souffl and corn - on - the - cob with , his wife ( ) , and . She discovers has a bad cough . They want her to stay the night , but she refuses because of bad memories from her childhood . is aware that the nitrogen levels in the air are taking their toll more and more each day on their son . A day or two later , is back at the bunker and learns is dying . He confesses to her that is not possible and that he had lied to her . He could never solve the gravity equation to get people off . She believes her father knew all about 's scheme and that he escaped and purposefully left her and everyone else to die . dies . sends a video message to informing her of her father 's death and begs him to tell the truth that the whole thing had been a sham . The crew make it to 's a few months later ; the planet is perpetually cold , covered with glaciers , and has a poisonous atmosphere of methane filled with ice clouds . ( ) , who has been in cryosleep for over 35 years , is awakened by and has a mental breakdown and relieved he is rescued . He tells the story of the frigid , but beautiful world he lives in , indicating it has 80 % of 's gravity and a lower part is livable , possibly even a source of fresh water . Brand sees the video sent about her father dying and A being a sham . She is absolutely shocked and had no idea , but reassures her the equation was actually solved long ago and determined to be impossible before he ever went on the mission . The only way to ever get data would be to get inside a black hole , which is impossible without being killed . Back on , and her boyfriend , ( ) , another physicist , are driving in her through the bleak plains surveying the endless clouds of black smoke and families with their decrepit 80 - 90 year old vehicles on the road with their belongings in , much like Midwestern farmers in the 1930 's escaping to go west to find a better life . She knows the equation is solvable as long as it comes from a black hole and that only gave part of it . Somewhere in her subconscious , she has a gut feeling that the coordinates of dust on the floor of her bedroom long ago gave her a hint , along the books being pushed off the shelf , and with the code message for to " stay " . She has a feeling this " ghost " is a being that has tried to comfort her and help save humanity . She knows it 's not the end and that humanity is running out of time . Simultaneously , is showing the icy and forbidding world . is back at the homestead with examining 's son for his lungs . pulls off 's voice beacon and pushes off the and 's brother is outraged by 's comment that they ca n't stay and will die , hitting him in the face . reveals to that the planet is uninhabitable and that he sent the signal so he could take 's spaceship to return to . Murph confronts that her father never meant to save them , but escape and leave it up to her and outright refuses and tells her to leave , believing it 's his duty to take care of the farm to fulfill his promise for his father . is trying to kill by breaking his helmet 's visor , allowing the ammonia - rich air to suffocate . manages to reach his voice beacon that was taken off of his helmet by to call out for to rescue him . and are driving back to , but in a fit of rage , she pulls over and pours gasoline over corn crops and sets them on fire , in order to distract and get back to the farmhouse . has been rescued by . 's living quarters on the planet has exploded and killed . was killed because he was trying to retrieve data from 's robot , which was booby trapped and supposed to reveal the truth about the planet . comes out of the rubble to be rescued by and and they leave the planet . On , 's family is now out of the house and is now in her old bedroom trying to make sense of the past . Cooper and are leaving the planet , but is also in another shuttle trying to do so and refuses to listen to their pleas to not attempt to dock with the . is in her bedroom examining her old belongings to find out what the " ghost " might be telling her . has steadfastly refused to listen to the warnings from and not to dock with the , but he continues his efforts . He 's manually maneuvered the ship into docking position , but ignores the computer 's warnings of " imperfect lock " and we see the docking pincers attempting to grab but failing to lock in . In mid - sentence the coupling release and the violent expulsion of air into space carries him with it , and resulting collision causes an explosion . The is now out of control and tells that he is going to dock with it , even though it is now in a rapid rotation . Though the centrifugal g - forces from the spin are enormous , is able to dock . However , they are unable to get back to and have to go to 's to even hope to survive , because of the life support being destroyed . They have to slingshot around the black hole in order to make it to 's and on manual controls . During the harrowing orbit around , and detach their respective shuttles and get sucked into the black hole , sacrificing themselves to collect data on the singularity , and propel and CASE faster by reducing the ship 's mass . Cooper separates from in his , without her prior knowledge , and is on a path that will take her to 's . He realizes the cost of orbiting the black hole due to the gravitational time dilation will be 51 years , but takes the chance . is outraged with and now left alone with 's shuttle falls into the black hole , gravitational forces begin to rip it apart . is descending towards the center of the black hole with pellets that look like sleet hitting his spaceship . The computer of his ship tells him to eject himself and without reluctance , he does it . Cooper descends in the black hole towards a grid full of cubbyholes thinking he 's dead and finds himself in some sort of afterlife and unaware of what sort of surroundings he 's in which resembles a tesseract . He hits an object along with a bunch of others that look like books stacked and knocks one down , revealing ten - year - old reacting at an object falling from her bookshelf back at the farmhouse . He knocked down the lunar lander model shown at the beginning of the movie . He 's screaming out for , but she walks away with it and does n't hear him . Then he sees in another part of the grid pleading for her father not to leave . Cooper watches this begging himself not to go and to stay using by knocking the books off the shelf . Cooper breaks down realizing that he should have listened and not gone on the mission . Then there is adult at the bedroom while the fire is still burning and she realizes all along that her father himself was the ghost communicating with her feeling comforted and reassured . Now it 's all making sense to her and she 's no longer angry with him and has hope . But she 's still trying to find out what her father is trying to signal to her , recalling the events of the dust storm coordinates and the books falling off . gets out of his grief - stricken state that he survived and tells that some fifth dimensional beings sent him there to communicate with and that his love for his daughter sent him there to help her . Cooper is delighted to see is there with him . realizes that the mission was not a mistake and that he will get done what he needs to . has been the chosen one to save humanity , but is the one chosen to help engineer it . He sends the coordinates to himself at the farmhouse to , then the data from the black hole through via to a wristwatch he gave before he left , which is the gravity equation . put the watch back on the shelf making it possible for to add the black hole equation to it . picks up the old wristwatch out of a box of her old keepsakes seeing the second hand with the realizing it 's the key . is pleading with to get out and for them to leave because the fire is out . Murph leaves the farmhouse with the watch in her hand , and angry returns , but she tells him about the watch , embraces him assuring her father was the ghost all along and will save them . is befuddled by it all , but accepts her hug . Murph returns to the bunker and completes the equation using the data from the wristwatch . She writes it all down , and throws the papers off the deck of the centrifuge under construction that the equation is solved . She kisses in a fit of happiness . So what 's going to happen soon might save most of remaining humanity . Back in the black hole , the tesseract is now closing up , with convinced it all worked and is comforted that future human beings constructed it to make all this happen and tells everything is okay . He comes across the when it passed through the wormhole and touches 's hand , then knocked unconscious into the orbit of with a couple of beaming lights approaching him . Cooper wakes up to find himself in a hospital bed . A very clean room with background noise of a baseball bat cracking a ball and birds chirping . A doctor tells him to take it easy jokingly telling him he is now 124 years old , but he still looks the same in his mid to late 30s . The doctor tells he 's very lucky to be alive because space rangers found him with only minutes left in his oxygen . Cooper looks outside the window of his room with kids playing baseball with a batter hitting a ball into the sky , which turns out to be the skylight of an upside down house with kids cheering at the window being broken . is told he 's on orbiting and thinks the station is named after him , but it was named after his daughter . She 's still living and on another space station and will be there to visit him in a couple of weeks despite her age and health . is delighted that did indeed work out and that the gravity equation was solved . The very centrifuge that was the bunker is now a space station to sustain human life . is now released from his hospital room by a tour guide and shown the station , an cylinder with a old world rural American environment and has artificial sunlight beaming from one side , which was the same place the rocket took off from 89 years ago . They pass by a group of sleek ranger ships that are more efficient than what he used and he takes a great interest in them . He is led to a museum exhibit , which is his old farmhouse , only much cleaner and restored . There are videos all over the place of elderly people telling of the dust bowl they lived in , whom you saw at the beginning of the movie , one of which is his daughter . He finds a shorted out in the farmhouse the rangers recovered and immediately repairs him . is sitting on the front porch that " night " with drinking beer like he and used to do , but very dissatisfied at the artificial surroundings and pretending to be home . He 's more interested in the spaceships than anything else and still yearning to explore the unknown . Plus almost everybody he knew is now dead and he was n't welcomed back as a hero . Cooper is about to go to the hospital room where the elderly ( now played by ) is living out the final days of her life -- she 'd insisted on being brought to the station to say goodbye to her father . A nurse tells that her family is in there and that she 's spent the last two years in cryosleep . He was n't aware she had a family and carefully opens the door with over a dozen people , from small children to middle aged adults surrounding her bed . His grandchildren , great - grandchildren , great - great - grandchildren , and their spouses are there , yet he pays no mind to them while they are puzzled by his appearance . His main interest is seeing his daughter . Murph breaks down in delight at the sight of him , and he takes her hand without any reluctance or awkwardness , even though he 's the same age he was when he left and she 's 99 - years - old and near death . He assures her he was the ghost that communicated to her in her room and she already knew for years even though nobody believed her . He tells her he 's now here for her , but in her still feisty and stubborn ways , she does n't want him to see her die , saying her kids are here for her and that she forgave him and made peace with his disappearance decades ago . slowly leaves her room to see her one last time and she 's surrounded by her beloved family and his descendants he knows nothing about . Knowing the space station is not where he belongs , he takes 's advice to go seek out , who has landed on 's to start colonization . It is a desolate place resembling , but the air is breathable and can sustain life , so it 's the best humanity can do outside the space stations . Edmonds died long ago and is buried by , but continues to set up camp and puts herself in cryosleep . Cooper steals one of the new generation ranger ships he 's been obsessed with and goes with through the wormhole to find her and beat the rangers at their mission.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > Set in late 1930s , , , Jewish waiter ( ) uses cunning wit to win over an Italian schoolteacher , ( ) , who 's set to marry another man . Charming her with " , ! " , getting the timing perfect every time , and whisking her away on a green horse ( do n't ask ! ) ensures they soon live together happily in 's uncle , 's ( ) , house . Bringing up their 5 year old boy , ( ) , the war continues without them noticing until one fateful day when the arrest and his son at the uncle 's house during preparation for 's birthday party , and transfer them to a concentration camp . demands to be taken too , thus is devastated to see his non - Jewish wife board the train . Protecting his son from the vile truth , tells that they are just on a big hoilday , and he turns the camp into a big game for , claiming that they must win 1000 points to win a real tank and leave . His elderly uncle , however , is on a different " team " and is lead towards the showers first . must complete " tasks " for the camp " moderators " ( ie . the ) , while avoiding the impending fate with everything he can offer . His quick thinking saves from the truth when a German officer requires a translator . Despite not speaking a word of German , steps forward and makes up the " " from the 's body language , claiming that tanks , scoreboards and games of Hide and Seek litter the camp , while cleverly stating that can not cry , ask for his mother or declared he 's hungry , resulting in the loss of the " game " , in other words , death . Giosu later refuses to take a shower , and unknowingly escapes being gassed , so hides him with the help of other Italian prisoners , since there are no other children . Playing messages over the tannoy for , kept prisoner on the other side of the camp , the family build up hope , only for it to be diminished by the . With the help of 's former German friend , , can hide Giosu amongst the German children , while waiting the 's meals . With the days becoming steadily worse , realises that time is short and that he must make certain sacrifices if his son is ever to see the tanks roll over the hills , and be reunited with his mother . Giosu is pessimistic , and does n't believe that there are any real tanks or games . in a junction box for the last time , telling him that everyone is looking for him , jeapordises his own survival to prevent the discovering , while he attempts to free , giving his own life away at the same time . The break into the seemingly deserted camp the following morning . Giosu emerges just as a tank pulls around the corner . Hitching a lift out , soon spots his mother and the film closes.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The movie opens with a group of people running through a field of wheat , frantically searching for something or someone . We then hear an unfriendly voice saying " You love your sister ? You make any noise , know what movie then proceeds with an old man in a retirement center named ( ) , waking up from an unpleasant dream . He takes two pieces of dry toast from an orderly , who mentions 's habit of taking long walks outside the ground . The orderly is worried about , but allows him to continue with his daily routine . and several other residents are watching TV when an old movie with dancing to the song " " is on . sees it and is suddenly overcome by emotion , so he walks away , followed by his friend ( ) . realizes that the movie has awakened some powerful memories in , and asks about it . tells his story : he was a prison guard during the , in charge of , informally called " The , " because of its green tile floor . 's most powerful memory of this time took place in 1935 .... The story then flashes back to the 1930 's at the , where a young ( now played by ) suffers from a urinary infection . Some of the other guards- " " ( ) , ( ) , ( ) and ( ) - bring in a new inmate . makes quite a spectacle out of the arrival , repeatedly yelling " Dead man walking ! " through the complex , to the annoyance of the other guards . The convict 's name is ( ) " like the drink , only not spelled the same . " He is a gigantic muscular negroid man , but when talks to , they find that he has the mindset of a small child- very meek and apparently scared of the dark . After has been placed inside his cell , he mysteriously states that he " tried to take it back , but it was too late . confronts with his constantly rousing behavior , but when shows nothing but disrespect for authority , sends him off the to attend work elsewhere . is not happy about this , and in frustration , he lashes out at another inmate named ' ' ( ) , breaking 's fingers . is given a copy of 's records , and finds that he was sent to Death Row after being convicted for the murder ( and implied rape ) of two small girls . After the two girls went missing , a posse went looking for them , finding sitting in an open field , crying uncontrollably while holding the dead girls in his arms . As he was arrested , stated that he " tried to take it back , but it was too late . "Later on , is outside when he is met by ( ) . gives the execution papers for an inmate named ( ) , and has a conversation with him about . It 's revealed that is the nephew of the governor 's wife , and his powerful political connections are what got him hired- and keep him in the job , because is apparently " stupid and mean " according to the other guards . finds out that they have already received a complaint about being removed from the , even though he broke an inmate 's fingers . However , has also learned that has applied for an administrator job at a mental hospital , which would mean better pay and better hours , and with a little luck , no more on the . theorizes that wants to witness an execution up close before moving on to a new job . also mentions that his wife , , is not well . She suffers from bad headaches and is scheduled for an X - ray in order to find the source of the problem . That night , talks about and his concerns for with his wife ( ) . He also regrets that they can not make love as long as he has his infection , but waves away her advice to see a doctor for it . Next day , spots a mouse in the cell block . They watch it run into a small room in the corner , which turns out to be a padded room for dangerous inmates but is currently used for storage . The guards check everything in the room but do not find the mouse . A few hours later , arrives , spots the mouse and goes into a fury trying to kill it . The mouse goes back into the padded room , and intends to go in . The other guards purposely do n't tell him that they already tried that , and watch in amusement as unpacks the entire room again , to no avail . Afterwards , berates for scaring the inmates in his pursuit of the mouse . does n't care , thinking the inmates are contemptible . feels differently , believing that the inmates are under enough stress since they are waiting to die ; if put under more strain , they could " snap " and cause serious problems . After more of 's insolence , grabs him , but threatens to use his connections as nephew to the governor 's wife to get the others fired if they hurt him . retorts that if he ever makes such a threat again , they will " have a go " at him , even at the cost of their jobs . While is granted one final meeting with his family , and the others prepare the auditorium with the electric chair for his upcoming execution . They do a rehearsal with the prison 's elderly janitor , - ( ) helping them . instructs to watch and learn while the others prep the electric chair . One of the guards explains to the necessity of putting a wet sponge on the convict 's head before the cap with the electrodes is attached ; this will cause the electric current to go straight through the head , and allow the execution to go more smoothly . That night , is prepared for the execution . In his final talk with , he recalls his most pleasant memory , and asks if he believes that if a man repents for his crimes , that he will go back to the time that he was most happy . says he believes that exact thing . leads 's execution , which is carried out with little problems ( although needs two jolts of electricity before his heart stops ) . Afterward , confronts with his new job opportunity , stimulating him to take it now that he has witnessed an execution . However , reveals that he wants to be " out front " ( placed in charge of an inmate 's execution ) before he leaves . Next day , the inmate named has found the mouse again , named it " " and is trying to tame it . The mouse is able to fetch a spool of thread as a trick . The other guards allow to keep as a pet . Even is uncharacteristically supportive of this , suggesting they get the mouse a box to sleep in . meets with again , getting word of a new inmate coming in , a man named ' ' , who killed three people in a holdup . is almost in tears ; the doctors have told him that his wife has a tumor the size of a lemon in her brain , virtually inoperable and eventually fatal . That night , suffers from his urinary infection even more ; he is almost in constant pain . He intends to see the doctor the next day after the new inmate has been brought in . and go to retrieve from the mental hospital , where he is in an apparent trance , presumably from medication . As soon as enters the , he springs to life , clearly having faked his drug - induced stupor . He surprise - attacks the guards and incapacitates by kneeing him in the groin . is nearly strangled , and is nailed to the floor in shock , unable to intervene despite 's cries for help . Finally , comes in and takes out . urges the others to go and report what has happened , and stop by the medical facility , while he will hold the . As soon as the others have left , he collapses in pain . then asks to speak with . With great effort , approaches 's cell , but grabs and puts his hand over 's groin . holds on for several seconds , until the lights flare brightly . then lets go , coughing and gasping until he releases a cloud of gnat - like spores from his mouth that disappear in the air . asks what happened , but can only say " I helped " . He becomes tired and goes to sleep . Later , when visits the washroom , he feels no pain at all : 's act has healed his infection . comes home and feels completely reborn , making love to his wife almost all night . The next morning , calls in sick for work , but goes into town to see 's public defender , ( ) who preceded over 's trial . voices his doubt about , no longer believing that such a kind and gentle man could be responsible for such a horrible crime . , however , is absolutely convinced of 's guilt , and compares to the dog that attacked his own son one day for no reason . The next day , presents with a loaf of cornbread baked by his wife , as a thanks for 's " help " . Coffey shares the cornbread with and , but does not give any to , who is blatantly racist . This enrages , who takes his fury out on the guards over the next few days . He urinates on 's shoes and spits the chocolate filling from a all over , so the guards use a fire hose to catch off guard , then wrap him up in a straitjacket and send him to the padded room . Despite 's promise to behave every time he gets out , the padded room becomes his frequent residence for a while . 's execution is coming nearer , and the guards are having a talk with him about it . 's main concern is what will happen to . suggest sending him off to a magical place called ' ' in , but first , they feel that should do a show with for the prison staff . The rehearsal for 's execution takes place the next day , as performs his show with . has decided to put in charge , in the hope that he will finally leave the prison immediately afterward . 's show is a big success and 's rehearsal went well too , so both men seem to be on good terms for a change . However , in a momentary lapse of concentration , walks too close to the cells and is grabbed through the bars by . menaces for a while before letting him go , and wets himself in terror . , he threatens the guards to never mention this to anyone . states that " what happens on the , stays on the . " They will not say anything about what happened . Del , however , delights in being humiliated , much to 's anger . Later on , runs across the room between cells . walks up and stomps on the mouse , coldly uncaring about what he has done , leaving screaming in agony . asks for the mouse , so picks it up and hands it to . The other guards watch in shock , , and possibly horror as light shines from 's hands . coughs , releases another cloud of spores , and runs across the room -- as good as new . , seeing that the mouse is uninjured , is furious - thinking the guards have set out to make a fool out of him . confronts and gives him an ultimatum- will transfer out immediately after 's execution , or the others will go public about 's record of mistreatment of the prisoners and his inadequate behavior on the . agrees . The night of 's execution has arrived . Just before he " walks the " to the electric chair , gives to , knowing that he will be taken care of . When points out that he can not have a mouse sitting on his shoulder during an execution , volunteers to take care of . is placed on the chair in front of the audience as starts the ceremony . As his last lines , an emotional asks for forgiveness for his crimes , and asks not to forget about . deviously responds by saying that is n't real ; the men only mentioned it to keep him quiet , which upsets both and the guards . Percy proceeds by hooking up to the electrodes , with one small exception- he purposely does not soak the sponge he places on 's head , wanting to punish one more time . notices that the sponge is dry , but just too late : the electricity has already been activated . As a result , the execution is excruciating for Del : he convulses and screams in pain , much to the increasing horror of the audience . At the same time , is hysterically crying as he seems to telepathically feel 's struggle . , however , is ecstatically jeering and shouting in joy over 's ordeal . and the other guards watch apprehensively , but do n't dare turn off the electricity , thinking that it will not take much longer . However , they are sadly mistaken - 's agony is prolonged to the point where he even catches fire . The horrified audience starts to panic and flees the scene , despite 's assurance that everything is okay . notices that is averting his eyes , but forces him to watch until finally dies . orders him to put out the fire with an extinguisher . Afterwards , claims he did n't know that the sponge needed to be wet , upon which violently punches him . restrains , saying what 's done is done , and is n't worth fighting over . comes in and angrily demands to know what went wrong . blames 's inexperience for the disastrous execution , but adds that was about to accept his new job at the mental institution anyway , cleverly forcing him to honor their agreement . Upon returning to the , finds that has ripped up his mattress and is cheerfully singing in celebration , but stops when he is threatened with solitary confinement for the rest of his time . talks to a grief - stricken . , who was in 's hands when it happened , must also have felt 's pain , and has fled ; does not expect him to return . and his wife go to visit and the next day . seems pretty well , but reveals that she is rapidly falling apart . She is losing her memory and experiencing severe behavioral changes , including uncontrollable cursing . decides to invite the other guards ( minus ) to dinner later and discusses 's acts of healing both him and . states that he can no longer watch what is happening to , so he wants to sneak out to try and heal her . The others are very skeptical , pointing out that is a convicted murderer , and it would be disastrous if they would be discovered , or if he escapes . puts forth his belief that is innocent ; he " does not see putting a gift like that in the hands of a man who would kill a child . " The other guards agree to help , thinking it is worth the risk . Most of the men have grown - up children , but since 's children are still young , he will stay behind on the Mile so that he has plausible deniability in case something goes wrong . The next day , they carry out the plan . brings some drinks , and offers one that is drugged to , which puts him to sleep . The others then gag , put him in the straitjacket and place him in the padded room for a few hours , supposedly as " retribution " for what he did to , but in reality so that he will not see them leaving . has memorized a cover story in case that someone comes over : went crazy and attacked the guards , so they put him in the padded room ( which would explain any sounds coming from it ) while the rest is at the medical facility . They open up 's cell , and he is excited at the prospect of going for a ride outside and help . However , on their way out , , not entirely out cold yet , grabs 's arm . is apparently horrified by what he sees when touching , who finally falls asleep . They arrive at 's home , and threatens them with a shotgun , thinking there is a prison riot or escape attempt going on . carefully talks him down , while goes upstairs to meet . gets very close to 's face , and something comes out of her mouth and into his , making the light in the room shine intensely , even causing a small earthquake . breaks the connection with her , falling down coughing . sits up , looking much healthier and having no memory of anything that happened before her X - ray . Hal collapses , weeping at his wife 's restoration . continues to cough , unable to release the " spores " like before . gives a pendant with the mark of the healer as a present . The men return to the prison , and is still very ill from the encounter . mentions that has almost regained consciousness , so they quickly put back in his cell . is released from solitary , looking aggravated . tells him to take it like a man , and responds that he is going to give it some serious thought . The others fear that he will talk about this one day , but that is a worry for another time . As leaves , grabs him through the bars , holds his face close to his , releases the spores directly into 's mouth , and lets go of him . , in a daze , walks over to 's cell . , just coming to , taunts him some more . , a tear running across his face , empties his revolver into 's chest . The others seize , who leans back and coughs up the remaining black spores . asks why he did this . states that and were " bad men " , and he punished them for it . He tells that he needs to see for himself , and sticks out his hand . Over the protests of the other guards , takes 's hand , and immediately starts seeing the memories of that is carrying . was a worker on the farm where the two little girls lived . One night , he snuck into their room and abducted them . He threatened them that if one would scream , he would kill the other . While the electricity around them goes haywire again , sees that was responsible for the double murder that was convicted for . After finally letting go , tells a devastated that killed the girls with their love for each other . He is constantly plagued by horrible images like this , and the whole ordeal has exhausted him now . Hal and the police arrive at the , where , upon examination , appears to be catatonic . tells that he will cover for him and his men as much as he can , even at the cost of his job , but he needs to know if any of this is connected to what happened at his house . thinks for a while , but denies it . is taken away and sent to a mental hospital , ironically the same place where he was supposed to be an administrator . He is put in the same room where he once picked up , presumably to stay there for the rest of his life . Now that he knows is innocent , is unsure how to proceed . He talks to his wife that night and she suggests talking to to see what he wants . The next day , and the others have a talk with , even asking him if they should just " let him go . " does not want to escape , as he does n't want to get them in trouble . With regards to the upcoming execution , asks how he could ever justify killing an innocent man before . tells him not to worry ; he reveals that in addition to healing , he can also feel the pain of all others around him . He does not wish to continue with such pain and darkness in the world , so the execution would be an act of kindness , even for a crime he did not commit . offers a last request ; states that he has always wanted to see a " flicker show " ( a motion picture ) . They bring in a movie projector with the film " , " the same movie that the elderly was watching at the beginning of the movie , which is what triggered 's memories , particularly when is dancing to " " . watches in , saying " they like angels!"The day of 's execution finally arrives . has to take 's pendant , but promises to return it to him after his death . The guards take to the auditorium , where senses immense hostility from the audience , which prominently features the dead girls ' parents who loudly jeer at him . tells to focus on the feelings of the guards , who have nothing but sympathy for him . is strapped to the chair as the guards watch on in tears . As per 's tearful request , does not put a hood over his face , as he is still scared in the dark . makes extra sure that the sponge is wet before placing the cap . Before giving the order to activate the electricity , steps up and shakes 's hand . Again , he hears 's voice saying " he killed them with their love " . As the chair is activated , the execution goes smoothly , and dies . Afterwards , puts the pendant back on his neck . The elderly 's voice cuts in and states that he and left The soon after , unable to carry on after seeing die . They transferred to a youth corrections ' facility . admits that 's tale is " quite a story , " but she does not completely believe it . She points out that something does not add up : mentioned his son being grown up in 1935 , which means he should be much older than he appears . takes on a walk , and they come to a cabin in the woods . There is a mouse sleeping in a small box ; is shocked to meet . We see a flashback to returning to the shortly after 's execution : he finds the mouse again , and has kept him ever since . The cabin is not exactly Mouseville , but it is a good place for him . states that he is now 108 years old , and that he believes " infected him ( and ) with life . " He thinks that was probably an accident : when held him during 's execution , he inadvertently gave the mouse the gift of longevity ; received it when he took 's hand after 's death . feels that this is his punishment for killing a genuine miracle of - he must stay alive and watch everyone he cares about , including friends like , grow old and die before his own death . He has already survived his friends from the , and , his wife , and even his son . Later , is seen at 's funeral , quietly wondering just how much longer he has to go on . He has no doubt in his mind that he will die one day , but if can extend the life of a mouse for so many years , how long does he need to go one living ? " We each owe a death , " he states , " There are no exceptions . But oh , sometimes The seems so long . " The film ends with close - up of > 

 < synopsis > Note : Italicized paragraphs describe scenes added for the film 's 1997 special edition and updated for its DVD release . An opening title card reads:'A long time ago in a galaxy far , far away ... 'It is a period of civil war . spaceships , striking from a hidden base , have won their first victory against the evil . During the battle , spies managed to steal secret plans to the 's ultimate weapon , the , an armored space station with enough power to destroy an entire planet . Pursued by the 's sinister agents , ( ) races home aboard her starship , custodian of the stolen plans that can save her people and restore freedom to the galaxy . 'Following the opening crawl , the frame moves down in the star field and we see a pitched battle between two starships in orbit around the desert planet of . A small blockade runner , the , is being pursued by a mammoth star destroyer , the . Inside , protocol droid ( ) and utility droid - ( ) are tossed about as their ship endures a barrage of laser bolts , and " " concludes that escaping capture will be impossible . The ship is so heavily damaged that its main power reactor must be shut down . It is caught in the Imperial destroyer 's tractor beam , pulled into the hold of the larger ship , and boarded by stormtroopers from the 's 501st . A huge firefight ensues in the corridors of the ship , with many soldiers being lost in the battle . When the smoke clears , ( ; voice : ) , a man dressed in a black cape , black armor , and a black helmet that obscures all his features , briefly surveys the damage before interrogating the ship 's captain , , who claims that the ship is on a diplomatic mission to the planet . Vader perceives that he is lying , noting that a consular ship would have an ambassador on board . ( In actuality there is a diplomat aboard - - but she is hiding from , the second - ranking man in the , which tends to support 's thesis that somebody on this ship is up to something . ) Upon learning that " the plans " were not downloaded into the ship 's computer , strangles the captain . He then tells the troops to search the entire ship and to bring all the passengers to him - alive . and - manage to escape damage from the firefight . - meets up with , who loads him with the stolen plans and records a holographic message for the small droid to take to the planet 's surface . - and get away from the ship aboard an escape pod and go to the planet below ; Imperial troops choose not to destroy the pod , as their scans detect no living organism on board , and presume it ejected due to a malfunction . Moments later the princess is stunned by Imperial troops and taken to . He tells her that the have stolen some secret Imperial plans and transmitted them to her ship . She feigns ignorance and protests to that she is a member of the on a diplomatic mission to the planet , but does n't believe her and orders her taken away . 's adjutant aide , ( ) , insists that holding her captive is dangerous ; news of her captivity would generate sympathy for the rebellion against the . Vader instructs to deceive the and permanently erase any trace of 's whereabouts by faking her [ accidental ] death . Upon being notified by another officer that an empty escape pod was jettisoned during the firefight , he concludes that the hid the stolen plans in the and - land on the desert planet ; - mentions a mission to deliver some plans , but is more concerned with staying in one piece long enough to find civilization . The two split up , and both are eventually captured by a group of diminutive scavengers called . The are junk traders , and - and are their newest assets . Meanwhile , a unit of find the crashed pod and discover droid parts and tracks leading away from the crash site . The travel to the Great Flat settlement to sell droids and equipment to local homesteaders , eventually arriving at the homestead of ( ) , a moisture farmer . The farmer purchases for his translation skills , as he is fluent in six million forms of communication , but initially decides to buy a cheaper utility droid , - , which breaks down almost immediately after purchase . Eager to deflect accusations of selling shoddy merchandise , the offer as a replacement . accepts and tells his young 18 - year - old nephew , ( ) , to clean them up and put them to work . had plans to meet some friends in the nearby town of , but his plans are put aside for work . During the cleanup , stumbles across a short clip of the message stored in by . The message is for someone named ' Obi - ' , and is a desperate plea for help . insists that the message is simply a malfunction ( " old data " ) , but insists on hearing the complete message , intrigued by 's beauty . then states that if removes his restraining bolt , he might be able to play the rest of the message . removes the bolt , but does n't play the message and claims not to know what is talking about . is called away for dinner ( forgetting to replace the bolt , which will keep within the boundaries of the moisture farm ) and asks to finish cleaning R2.During dinner , tells his aunt and uncle that the droids may belong to someone called - . This news greatly disturbs , but he wo n't say why . asks if - is possibly related to a hermit named who lives several miles away in the area , a vast terrain of sand and rocky canyons . claims that is " just a crazy old man , " and that - is dead ; makes a comment which seems to indicate that - knew 's long - deceased father , , but when presses for details , his uncle quickly changes the subject and instructs to erase the droids ' memories the next morning . - who hopes to leave home for training at a nearby to become a space pilot - leaves the room angrily to return to cleaning the droids . 's ( ) tells that is too much like his father to remain with them , but holds out hope that 's desire for adventure will subside - and expresses a fear that is too much like his father ... suggesting that may know something of 's terrible past . After dinner , discovers that - has escaped to find - . tells 3PO that it 's too late to look for because of the dangerous People ( also called ) in the area , and that they will set out first thing in the morning to go look for him ( hopefully before discovers that due to 's negligence , his newest investment has disappeared).The following morning , and 3PO set out in 's landspeeder to find . They locate him on the scanner and catch up with him . As soon as they find him , informs them that his own scanner is picking up several creatures closing in on them . fears the People have found them , and confirms it using a set of minoculars . One ambushes them , hitting over the head and knocking him unconscious . goes tumbling down the side of a sand dune . R2 runs and hides . After stealing some parts off of 's speeder , the People are frightened away by the sound of a vicious beast . The sound comes from a mysterious hooded figure . The figure checks on and takes his hood off to reveal his features . He is an old , bearded man , who gently touches 's forehead . quickly comes to and recognizes the man as ( ) . tells the man that his droid claims to belong to an - . This knowledge startles the old man , who reveals ( with a look of ancient mystery on his face ) that he is - but that he has n't gone by that name in many years . After rescuing , they go to - 's home to discuss the matter . At - 's home , learns that - knew and that they were both of the and veterans of the talked about ' Wars ' . had been told by his uncle that his father was a navigator on a spice freighter ; had been trying to protect from the truth about his father , or perhaps simply trying to keep him safe . ( Note : it 's not clear that knows the truth about 's father , other than that he was killed in a dangerous line of duty ) . - then produces 's lightsaber , an energy sword which was the chosen weapon of the ; he seems to have kept it safe for some time . He gives the weapon to , saying that wanted him to have it when he was old enough , but would have none of it . Obi - explains that a receives his power from the , an energy field that is created by all living beings that " surrounds us , penetrates us , and binds the galaxy together . " But there is also a to the , which draws power from negative emotions and baser impulses . A young named , who was once a pupil of - , was seduced by this . betrayed and murdered , then became the of the , the most feared enforcer of the . In this capacity , he proceeded to hunt down his former comrades , and the is now all but extinct . At this point - has R2 play 's complete message . The princess reminds - of his past service to her father in the , and conveys his plea to assist in the against the . She senses that her mission to bring - to has failed , and tells - that she has embedded information crucial to the rebellion in 's memory banks . She asks - to deliver the droid to her father on so that the information can be retrieved , and repeats her plea that he is now her " only hope . - can not hope to undertake such a mission alone due to his advanced age , so he tells that he should learn the ways of the and accompany him to . is adamant that he ca n't go , and that he must stay on Tatooine and help his uncle . Obi - counters that the needs 's help , and that the young woman in the message needs 's help ( though she has not mentioned any personal request for help ) . They decide to go to the city of so that - can book a transport to space port . Meanwhile , the has docked at the , a gargantuan space station resembling a small moon . Vader rendezvous with ( ) , the high ranking governor of the , and they enter a conference room where they meet the station 's leaders in a high level conference : ( ) , ( ) , and ( ) among other Imperial officers . As the argue about the best way to exploit their newest " technological terror , " tells them that the has decided to dissolve the ; giving full control of the 's star systems to each of the regional governors under him and use the to intimidate all of the 's star systems into submission , suggesting that fear of force is preferable to its actual use . is extremely confident in the new space station , calling it ' the ultimate power in the universe . ' However , is adamant that the is not invincible , and that the will figure this out if they have a chance to read its schematics . tells them that the ability to destroy a planet is insignificant next to the power of the . callously mocks 's heritage , noting that the has not helped him recover the stolen schematics or pinpoint the 's headquarters . , uses the to strangle , until orders him to stand down . The commanders decide to focus on interrogating until she gives up the location of the . They will then use the to destroy it , killing two birds with one stone . As and his companions travel to , they find the sandcrawler , completely destroyed with all the slaughtered ; although they appear to be victims of the , - recognizes signs which indicate an attack by stormtroopers . realizes that the only reason Imperial troops would kill is because they are looking for the droids which escaped the battle , and he races home , over - 's objections that he is likely endangering his own life , hoping to warn and . However , is too late . The Imperials have apparently come and gone , burned the homestead , and killed his aunt and uncle . returns to - ( who has used the opportunity afforded by 's trip to accord the massacred some measure of dignity ) , saying that with no reason to remain , he wants to go with him to . More importantly , he declares his wish to learn the ways of the and become a like his father once was . , - and the two droids now travel to , the spaceport and capital city of . Before entering the city , - warns and the droids that is a hotbed of crime and near - lawlessness . assures - that he knows how to handle himself in a fight . Upon entering the spaceport they are approached by Imperial troops at a roadblock asking questions about the two droids they have with them . Obi - appears to induce a trance - like state in the lead guard , persuading him that these are not the droids they are looking for . When is puzzled by the ease of their passage , - explains that the can have a strong influence on the weak - minded . At the , gets into a scuffle with two criminals , a deformed human named and his alien companion , who threaten to kill him . When one of the creatures pulls a gun on , the old defends himself with his lightsaber - slashing off the creature 's gun arm before it can shoot . Moments later they meet smuggler ( ) , captain of the , and his first mate , ( ) , a 7 - foot - tall , 200 - year - old . Upon learning that - and are trying to avoid Imperial capture , gives his price as 10,000 credits for the trip . balks at that price , stating that they could almost buy their own ship for that , but is dubious that they could fly it themselves . Obi - tells that they will pay him 2,000 credits now and 15,000 more once they reach . agrees . After and - leave , tells that 17,000 credits could really save his neck . As leaves to make pre - flight preparations , hangs back to take care of their bar tab , and is stopped by ( and ) , a bounty hunter working for feared crimelord , aka : the . Apparently some time earlier , had hired to transport a shipment of glitterstim spice ( an illegal narcotic ) , but had to dump the shipment due to an unexpected Imperial boarding . As points a blaster pistol at and forces him toward a secluded section of the bar , insists that he has the 8,000 credits he needs to cover the loss . suggests that give it to him as a bribe not to turn him over to , forcing to admit that he does n't actually have the money yet . Realizing that will either turn him over to or kill him for the bounty that has placed on him , quietly removes his heavy pistol under the table , and when admits that he would just as soon see him dead as alive , Solo pre - emptively fires and kills him . On his way out , throws the bartender a few coins , apologizing for " the mess " he left . At the docking bay , is confronted by the and several other associates . expresses frustration over 's death , and reminds of the nature of their business ; he can not " make any exceptions " of those who fail or cross him , lest he appear weak . insists that he will soon have enough money to pay off his debt , with interest , he just needs more time . reluctantly agrees , but warns that this is his last chance . sells his landspeeder to raise money for their initial payment to . They head to the docking bay where the is being prepared for flight . is somewhat perturbed to discover that the is a 60 - year - old , run - down YT-1300 freighter , but assures him that he has made extensive modifications to ensure that she can run rings around any modern capital ship . Meanwhile , Imperial troops believe they are hot on the trail of the two droids when a local informant tells them the whereabouts of the fugitives after recognizing and - . No sooner do , - and the board the than the Imperial troops come running into the docking bay , hoping to arrest and - and capture the droids . The troops fire at and the , but the ship manages to escape . Once they clear the planet , they are immediately pursued by two huge Imperial star destroyers . Solo remarks that his passengers must be of particular interest to the . They jump to light speed , escaping the Imperial ships . has been tortured by the and undergone a mind probe in an effort to extract the location of the ' home base . They have found nothing . , , and shift tactics , threatening to destroy the 's home planet of if she wo n't reveal the ' location . She reluctantly tells them that the base is on the planet . then orders his officers to proceed with 's destruction , noting that is too remote to make an effective demonstration of the 's power . is destroyed by a single blast from the 's enormously powerful laser blaster while is forced to watch . On board the , - is training in the ways of the when he is greatly disturbed by a tremor in the . He feels that millions of people have died in an instant amidst great suffering , though he does n't know how . He decides to meditate on this further as continues an exercise in allowing the to guide his reflexes . is not impressed , and explains that he does not believe in the . , however , manages to use his lightsaber to deflect four laser bolts in a row from a remote droid - all while wearing a helmet which covers his eyes . Back on the , and receive a report that there once was indeed a base on but it has long since been abandoned . Outraged at 's successful trickery , orders her scheduled for execution . realizes that he is learning how to sense the . One of the 's signals informs them that they are approaching , but upon exiting light speed , they find the is in an asteroid field instead of 's orbit . confirms that they are in the right location but that the planet is missing ; - quietly states that the planet has been destroyed by the , but laughingly insists that all the 's ships combined would n't have enough firepower to destroy a planet . Moments later they are overflown by an ( ) snubfighter . Obi - concludes it is too small for long range flight , so there must be an Imperial base or ship nearby . As they chase after the fighter to keep it from notifying the of their location , they see the fighter heading toward a small moon - the . They are caught in the 's tractor beam and , helpless to resist , are pulled aboard the station into a docking bay . - tells them that neither fighting or surrender are viable choices , but a third option is available to them . Imperial troops board the , but its crew are hiding in smuggling compartments below the floor . Vader orders scanning equipment to be brought aboard to look for life signs . While standing near the , he senses a presence he has not felt for some time . Vader leaves the hangar , pursued by the frustrating sense he is overlooking something of great importance . When a scanning teams boards the to set up their equipment , and manages to overpower them and lures the two guarding stormtroopers just outside on board as well to kill them both and steal their armor uniforms . The helmets conceal their identity and allow them to infiltrate a troop command center outside the docking port . Inside the command center , plugs into the station computer system and discovers the location of the tractor beam generator . Obi - sets out to shut down the generator so that the ship can leave . wants to accompany him , but - orders to stay , noting that 's destiny now splits paths from his own . Perhaps sensing that this is the last time he will see in this reality , he tells , " The will be with you ... always . - leaves , discovers that the princess is being held prisoner on board the station . suddenly takes the initiative , sparing no effort to convince and to assist him in what is surely going to be a very risky rescue . , initially scared for his own neck , eventually agrees , but only after suggests that a great monetary reward would surely follow her rescue . and take " captive " and assume their trooper identities in order to infiltrate the prison block . In the prison block , the officer in command becomes suspicious of their arrival since he was not notified about any prisoner transfer . As a result , and 's escorted " prisoner " escapes and a firefight erupts between the and , , and . They manage to take out all the Imperials , but set off an alarm in the process . A squad of troops are sent to investigate . and know they have only moments to find the princess 's cell and escape . They find the princess , but the arriving troops cut off the only escape route . shoots a hole in a garbage chute and tells everyone to dive in . They escape the Imperials , only to find themselves trapped in a large garbage compactor . To make matters worse , the compactor also houses a large , serpent - like creature - the dianoga - which yanks under the murky , stagnant water in the compactor , almost drowning him . The creature inexplicably lets go , but just as they catch their breath , the compactor activates and the walls begin to move in , threatening to crush , , , and . calls 3PO on the communicator and orders him to have shut down all garbage compactors in the detention level . R2 complies just in time to save them and then open their compactor 's door to let them out . Meanwhile , informs that he senses through the that is aboard the station . is doubtful , but the discussion is soon interrupted by an emergency report : has escaped ! tells a shocked and bewildered the true explanation for 's impossible escape - " - is here . The is with him . " Sensing that - wishes a final showdown , sets off to find him . Unbeknownst to anyone , has deactivated the tractor beam generator . After their escape from the compactor , and dispose of their stormtrooper armor , but keep the troopers ' utility belts and weapons . On their way back to the ship they 're cut off by more troops . They are split up , with and fighting together and and running on their own . After being cornered between a great air shaft and a group of troopers , shoots a blast door 's controls with his blaster , locking the troops on the other side of the door . Unfortunately , the blast also destroys the controls that extend the bridge across the air shaft . After a gunfight with stormtroopers on the other side of the shaft , uses a cable and grappling hook from his freshly confiscated Imperial utility belt to swing himself and safely across the gorge . - , on his way back to the , encounters . They exchange barbed comments . boasts to his former master that he is so much more experienced and powerful than he was the last time they met that the tables have now turned , with the more powerful of the two . Obi - replies that 's turn to evil has made him oblivious to the 's true power . A ferocious lightsaber duel ensues . , , and meet at the entrance to the docking bay . The lightsaber duel on the other side of the bay distracts the troops guarding the ship , allowing the four of them , along with and 3PO , to sneak across to board the . As and continue to fight , informs that if strikes him down , he shall become even more powerful , beyond what could possibly imagine . , seeing that the four heroes and two droids are safely boarding the , takes one last look from his comrade 's son to the man who betrayed him , and smilingly withdraws his saber , allowing to slice through him . His body instantly disappears . is stunned and confused by this , as he determines that no one is in 's now - empty cloak on the floor . , appalled by the sight of his mentor being struck down by , lets out a shout of horror , alerting all of the troops to their presence . Another firefight immediately erupts , and they barely make it aboard the ship with their lives . stays behind , attempting to shoot every Imperial soldier in the hangar , despite his friends urging him to join them on the ship so they can escape . Finally , he relents , hearing - 's voice telling him to run , as catches a glimpse of him through a rapidly closing set of blast doors . When the flies out of the docking bay , the Imperials are unable to activate the tractor beam , thanks to . Having blasted their way out of the station 's defense range , they are confronted by four fighters . and man two large gun turrets on the top and bottom of the and manage to destroy all four ships . starts to boast to about his amazing abilities during her rescue . She insists that the let them escape in order to track them to the base . is doubtful of that as she explains to that is carrying the technical readouts to the . She has high hopes that when the data is analyzed , a weakness can be found in the station . Back aboard the station , 's fears are confirmed as and discuss their plan to track the to the hidden base . The makes it to the base , located on the fourth moon of the gas giant . After 's data is analyzed , it is determined that the does indeed have a weakness that can be exploited ; a small ( two meters ) exhaust port not protected by any shielding , through which a well - placed proton torpedo could reach the main reactor and destroy the station . The port is situated in a narrow trench protected by spacecraft ( ) turbo - lasers . The commander , ( ) , theorizes that since the array is designed to repel large scale assaults from capital ships , it could easily be outmaneuvered by smaller and faster snubfighters . A plan is devised in which a squadron of - assault bombers ( , led by " " ( ) ) , will skim the trench . A second squadron ( , commanded by ( ) ) , comprised of the faster , more maneuverable X - Wing snubfighters , will attempt to draw enemy fire away from the bombers . will be flying one of the , under the call sign . Fellow pilot ( ) is skeptical about succeeding , but is confident that the task can be accomplished , noting that he used to shoot at animal targets on which were not much bigger than two meters . The set out to attack the just as the station enters the system . The will have to orbit to 's far side in order to have a shot at the moon on which the base is located . The approximately 30 fighters have less than 30 minutes to fly to the station and destroy it . As heads to the hanger , he is reunited with ( ) , who used to fly with on . congratulates on finally making it off and tells him that the coming battle will be just like old times . Having apparently collected the balance of his 17,000 credits payment for delivering the plans to the ( plus some unspecified reward for helping escape from the ) , refuses to join the fight , stating that his reward will be useless if he is killed , and that he would rather take his money and go pay off his debts . is disappointed , but boards his fighter and takes off , right after is loaded into the rear of the fighter to provide technical assistance . Upon departure , he hears what sounds like - 's voice speaking to him , saying " The will be with you . " He quickly dismisses it . Both squadrons approach the and briefly marvels at its size before cuts off the idle chatter and orders the squadrons to attack speed . initiates a strafing run on the station 's surface to divert attention from the bombers , and makes a run that detonates a mammoth fire within part of the - a fire so large his own ship suffers minor burns . When is informed that the turbo - lasers are having trouble targeting the small rebel ships , he orders fighters led by , his personal elite fighter squadron , to engage the Wings individually . In short order , six fighters join the battle , soon followed by others , and scrambles to keep them away from the trenches . warns a wingman of an attacking fighter but the - is immediately shot down before himself comes under attack ; swings behind the attacker and shoots him down . Vader notices and his - group breaking away from the primary attack . He assigns two pilots , and , to escort him as he boards a Advanced x1 fighter to engage the bombers himself . Before this command group launches , the sky battle rages on and himself comes under attack ; Wedge rescues him by shooting into the belligerent fighter literally nose to nose , just as and commence the attack into the trenches . Vader and his two wingmen easily outmaneuver the - , methodically dispatching them one by one ; first pilot is killed , as begins to panic despite angry urging by his surviving wingman . is then killed and the surviving ship aborts his run before he himself is destroyed . With effectively wiped out , orders the surviving X - Wing pilots to start a second attack run down the trench . As they approach the exhaust port , turns on his targeting computer as two other ships cover his tail from enemy fire . The escorting ships are destroyed , but they buy enough time for to take a shot at the exhaust port . His shot misses and merely impacts on the surface . Moments later he loses an engine to 's gunnery and his fighter spirals into the surface of the station . Now nominally in charge of , decides that it is his responsibility to try to destroy the port . is preoccupied trying to keep the ship running , despite all of the damage they are sustaining . With and flying his wing , they start down the trench . Moments later , they are pursued by and his wingmen , who partially disable 's ship . tells to disengage , seeing that he ca n't be of any help in a crippled ship . allows to withdraw , ordering his men to continue to pursue the two ships in the trench . Vader fires again , hitting ' ship and destroying it . is grieved by the loss of his friend , but presses on . As gets closer to his target , he hears the voice of - , telling him to " use the " and rely on his instincts more than the technology in his ship . Heeding that advice , switches off his targeting computer and continues flying down the trench . When asked by why he switched off the computer , responds that nothing is wrong . Meanwhile , the has completed its run around and is cleared to fire on the moon . The countdown for the firing sequence begins . tells that he has analyzed the attack and concludes there is a real threat to the station . scoffs at evacuation and insists the will prevail . He remains on the station while some of the Imperial officers and troops evacuate as a precaution . As draws on the power of the to help him hit his target , senses the strength of the in his prey . He takes a shot , which misses the ship but hits - . Just as he locks on to 's ship to finish him off , 's ship explodes unexpectedly . Out of nowhere appears the , which has just destroyed the Imperial fighter - diving vertically towards and the remaining wingman . This sudden turn of events distracts ; he loses control of his ship and crashes into 's . 's ship ricochets into the trench wall , destroying it , and sends 's ship spinning out of control , up and away from the . informs that he is all clear to fire . , having drawn upon the power of the , releases his proton torpedoes , which enter the exhaust port perfectly on target . , the and a few other fighters race away from the just as the prepares to fire on the moon . Only seconds before the station fires , it explodes into a huge fireball , sending millions of fragments into space . , , , and most of the senior Imperial staff are killed . With that triumph , reminds that the will be with him , always . , having been thrown into space during his collision with the wingman , is now apparently the only one to have escaped the station 's destruction . He eventually manages to regain control of his wildly gyrating fighter , and when he finally stabilizes , he flies off to meet the as the head home to their base . When they reach the base , is clearly delighted that returned to help him . is thrilled to see both of her friends alive . And everyone is ecstatic that the has been destroyed . Their celebration is briefly interrupted as is pulled from 's ship . He is heavily damaged from 's gunfire and does not respond to . The golden robot is terribly concerned , but and two mechanics assure him that is repairable and will be fine . Later , an awards ceremony is held in a huge hall . Hundreds of soldiers , officers , and pilots are present . A door at the rear of the hall opens to reveal , , and . They walk down the aisle to where awaits , along with several leaders and dignitaries . Also present are a freshly polished C-3PO and a freshly overhauled and looking better - than - new - . Upon reaching the front of the great hall , and are awarded medals for bravery by a smiling . The hall erupts into thunderous applause.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > Scenes described in red text appear only in the . The movie opens with shots of traffic and children in playgrounds . The sounds of children 's voices die out , followed by a flash - forward to in 2029 AD . The world has become a wasteland of wrecked cars , destroyed buildings , and black - charred playgrounds filled with skeletons and skulls . The voice of ( ) narrates : " 3 billion human lives ended on 29th , 1997 . The survivors of the nuclear fire called the war . They only lived to face a new nightmare : the war against the machines . "The foot of a metallic android smashes a skull on the ground . A battle starts between human guerrilla troops and a technically far superior robotic army . Crushing skulls beneath their tracks , robotic tanks open a full - frontal assault on the humans , who are trained to make use of what shelter the ruined terrain offers them . Flying aircraft search the ground for targets as androids sweep the terrain at places the tanks can not access . Although they suffer heavy losses , the humans manage to destroy several tanks , aircraft and androids . They even use old cars as crude assault vehicles , but the machines ' laser cannons are accurate and unrelenting . is saluted by his soldiers as he walks through a crumbling hallway and inspects the battlefield from a safe distance . The camera zooms in on his scarred face as 's voice - over continues : " , the computer that controlled the machines , sent two terminators back through time . Their mission : to destroy the leader of the human resistance : , my son . The first was programmed to strike at me in the year 1984 , before was born . It failed . The second was set to strike at himself when he was just a child . As before , the was able to send a lone warrior , a protector for . It was just a question of which one of them would reach him first . "The opening credits play in a montage of shots of playgrounds burning in an inferno . The credits end as the camera zooms in on the metal face of a , through the fire , until its red glowing eyes are in extreme close - up , accompanied by the thematic five rapid drumbeats . The action changes to a truck stop in the middle of the night . The wind scatters trash strewn around several trucks parked in the lot . Electric charges fill the air , jumping among several trucks . Out of nowhere , a brightly - lit orb appears , vaporizing a bowl in the ground and a section of a nearby truck . A large flash of light comes from the orb and it disappears , leaving a naked man crouching in its place . As the electrical charges slowly fade , the ( ) rises to its feet . It has the same appearance as the one sent through time in - ( 1984 ) to kill . We see its red point - of - view processing screen as it approaches the , a biker bar across the street from the truck stop , inspects the vehicles , mostly motorcycles , parked outside and enters . The bikers inside watch with a mixture of astonishment and amusement as the naked calmly walks among them , inspecting every male customer on the way . It even attracts a couple of looks from one of the waitresses . It stops in front of a cigar - smoking biker as it determines that the man 's clothes are a match to its body size . The calmly tells him that it needs his " clothes , boots , and motorcycle " , causing much hilarity among the other customers . The cigar man tells it that it " forgot to say please " and blows smoke in the 's face . He puts out his cigar on 's bare chest , only to be surprised that the pain does n't seem to bother it . The grabs the man 's hand and twists his arm . As the biker screams , another biker hits the in the head with a pool cue ; he 's hurled through the window for his trouble . The cigar biker is thrown into the kitchen and lands on the hot stove , burning his hands . A third tough biker pulls a knife on the . He stabs it with no effect and is quickly disarmed and pinned to the pool table with his own knife . The rest of the customers scramble away . The enters the kitchen , approaching the wounded cigar biker . The frightened biker grabs a pistol and tries to rack the slide but the grabs the pistol from him . Terrified , he quickly tosses his keys to the . As 's " Bad to the Bone " plays , the steps outside , fully dressed , and mounts one of the motorcycles , a large - . Before it can ride off , the barkeeper comes out with a lever - action shotgun and fires a warning shot , threatening to kill it if it does n't step off the bike . The gets off , calmly walks towards the man , and with a quick move , it relieves the barkeeper of his shotgun and sunglasses before riding off . In the city of , a police officer in a trash - strewn vacant lot underneath a bridge calls in a strange electrical disturbance to headquarters . As he inspects the area and notices a strange round hole burned into a chain link fence , he is approached from behind by a naked T-1000 ( ) , also a cyborg , less bulky than the . The T-1000 instantly kills the officer with a quick stab to the gut . The terminator picks up the cop 's gun , enters the police car fully clothed as a cop , and uses the car 's computer to find the address of . He finds the address , along with a police sheet on stating he 's already committed several minor offenses like shoplifting and public disturbances . The next day , 's foster parents ( ) and ( ) make several fruitless attempts to get to clean up his room , but he ignores and ridicules them and leaves on his bike with his friend ( ) . As they rocket off , plays ' Roses on his small portable stereo . In a cell at , a detention center for the criminally insane , does chin - ups on her bed frame , which she has stood on end . Psychiatrist ( ) is showing some interns around , telling them about 's acute schizo - effective disorder . It leads her to believe that a machine in human guise , called a " " , was sent back through time to kill her , and that the father of her child was a soldier from the future , sent back to protect her . Silberman bids her a good morning , to which pseudo - politely asks about his knee , which she stabbed with a pen some weeks before . has the interns take a look at her like she is a caged animal , informing them that she has tried repeatedly to escape . tells two orderlies that he does n't like seeing patients disrupt the furniture arrangements in their rooms and to make sure that takes her medicine . The orderlies enter the cell , but refuses the medication . They tell her to be good because she is on review that afternoon , but when she still refuses , they smack her in the gut with a baton , kick her around and zap her with a taser before they force the medication down her throat and leave her .. The T-1000 arrives at the home of foster parents and ask about . They tell him took off on his bike . It asks for 's picture , saying it only needs to ask some questions . Todd mentions that a big guy on a bike ( the ) had come by earlier asking about that morning , but despite its suspicious glance , the T-1000 assures them not to worry . breaks into an using a specialized decoding device . finds a picture of in 's bag ( it 's the picture that was taken of at the end of the - ( 1984 ) and was later given to ) . comments that is a complete psycho , because she got arrested for trying to blow up a computer factory . They take off for the mall to spend the money they 've stolen , missing the searching by a few blocks . is in a deep sleep from the medication when she is woken by a familiar voice . It is ( ) , the man who died protecting her from the first . He tells her that is in danger and that she needs to protect him , to which she replies that he does n't believe her anymore . Reese talks some strength back into her and repeats his earlier message : the future is not set , there is no fate but what we make for ourselves . She hugs him , but when she opens her eyes , is standing in the cell door opening , saying that there is not much time left in the world . He walks away , and follows him out of the hospital . She finds herself on a sunny grass field behind a fence . On the other side are children playing in a playground . She tries to warn them away , but can not speak . There is a sudden bright flash and she wakes up next to her bed in her cell . During the psychological review later that day , watches a video from one of her earlier evaluations , where she described her dream of the world and its children burning in a nuclear nightmare . She went into a fit of rage because no one believes her prediction . Silberman stops the video , and tells him that she is feeling much better now ; she no longer believes in the existence of Terminators , and recants her claim that the factory where she crushed one covered the whole thing up . Meanwhile , in a computer lab somewhere , computer developer ( ) is asked permission to conduct a test with a certain device that is only referred to as ' it . ' When one of his co - workers asks where ' it ' came from , he gives him the same answer he received from his superiors : " Do n't ask . " goes into the vault , where he observes a fragment of a computer chip and a metal robot arm that was clearly once attached to a . asks to transfer her to a minimum security ward , but he believes that she is faking her recovery , and thinks she will only use this transfer for another escape attempt . When he also refuses to let her see her son , she attacks him before being restrained and drugged by orderlies . Silberman looks at the camera and sarcastically states " Model citizen . is driving with through an abandoned canal when the passes overhead , identifies him and lays in a pursuit . Meanwhile , the , dressed as a cop , shows 's picture to a couple of girls ; they direct it to the . The arrives at the and identifies 's bike . While is inside playing arcade games , both the T-1000 and the ( carrying a long box full of roses ) are searching for him . The T-1000 finds the video arcade where it bumps into , who is getting some more quarters . It shows 's picture . pretends he does n't know the person in the picture , but quickly walks back to and warns him about the T-1000.John runs out the back door of the arcade into the mall service hallway . He eventually finds himself in a hallway , caught in between the and the T-1000 . As the two cyborgs advance , the T-1000 draws its service pistol and the produces a shotgun from the box of roses . Just as thinks he 'll be gunned down by either of them or both , the orders him to " Get down ! " . The shoots the T-1000 in the shoulder and deflects its aim . The T-1000 quickly recovers and empties an entire clip at , killing a janitor caught in the crossfire , while the puts itself in front of , shielding him from the bullets . While the T-1000 reloads , the breaks open a door , pushes to safety , and marches towards the T-1000 , shooting it repeatedly with its shotgun . It is n't until the fires its last round the T-1000 finally falls on its back . As the reloads its shotgun and watches , the large metallic holes its bullets made in the 's chest suddenly heal themselves . It gets up and there is a short struggle between the two cyborgs for the gun . In the fight , they force each other into the wall several times , until one wall finally gives , and they tumble into a clothing store . The T-1000 is quicker on its feet and clearly stronger , throwing the out through the shop - window , and continues its pursuit of . Shoppers are amazed to see the get back on its feet so quickly ( one of them manages to take some pictures ) , grabbing its shotgun and following and the the meantime , has reached his motorcycle , but has problems getting it to start . As the T-1000 enters the garage and dashes towards him , gets the bike to fire up and drives away , barely shaking off his assailant as he makes it to the street . The T-1000 hitches an involuntary ride from a passing truck by throwing its driver out and pursues with little regard for other motorists . It , in turn , is chased by the on its . makes it to an old drainage canal , apparently to safety , but the T-1000 's truck suddenly appears on an overpass , crashes through the railing , and dives into the canal . drives off , and despite the narrow width of the canal , the T-1000 gains on . Meanwhile , the drives along the edge of the canal , firing some shots at the truck , which is nearing a bridge spanning the canal . The bridge rips the roof off the truck 's cabin but the T-1000 has ducked away and maintains control of the vehicle . It tries to overrun as the reaches a dead end in the elevation and is forced to jump down with its bike into the canal . It manages to pass the truck and drive alongside , picks him up from his bike , puts him in front of itself , and fires a shot into one of the wrecker 's front tires . The truck crashes into another column in the canal and a spark in some loose wiring causes spilled fuel to ignite . The stops the bike and points its gun at the blazing fire , but only a burning tire rolls out . He drives away with , but seconds later , the T-1000 emerges as a shiny , featureless , liquid metal figure . Its features become more pronounced and its colors return to normal , returning to the form of the unharmed pseudo - cop . When emergency workers arrive , the T-1000 steals a police cruiser and drives off . As they ride off , asks the to pull over . His rescuer confirms it is a , a model 101 : a cybernetic organism , made of living tissue over a metal endoskeleton . checks the bullet holes in the 's back , but still has a hard time buying it . He already realizes that the has not come to kill him , but to protect him . The explains that it was re - programmed and sent back 35 years from the future , by himself , to be his protector in the current time . It 's evening , and while driving the bike , the explains that the other man is not human but a T-1000 : an advanced prototype made of a " mimetic polyalloy , " or liquid metal . It says they have to get out of the city and avoid the authorities . wants to stop at his house , but assures him that the T-1000 will try to reacquire him there , as the itself would try . The and stop by a pay phone because insists on calling his foster parents to warn them . answers , and expresses her concern for . is confused , as she is " never this nice . " He can hear through the phone yelling at the dog for barking continuously , remarking that the dog is actually barking . 's expression does n't change as she shifts the phone to her other ear and extends her left arm offscreen . is suddenly silent . worries that the T-1000 might be there already . The asks for the dog 's name ; its . It takes the phone and asks , with 's voice , what is wrong with ' Wolfie ' . says is fine . The hangs up and tells his foster parents are dead . On cue , the camera pulls back to reveal that " " is actually the T-1000 mimicking her . Its arm has formed into a silver blade , which has skewered through his mouth and spine . It retracts the blade , letting 's lifeless body fall to the ground , and it slowly reforms the blade back into 's arm . The T-1000 then resumes its cop form . As it leaves the house , the T-1000 walks toward the dog , who is barking loudly . It kills the dog with a quick slash , and rips off its collar ; it reads ' ' . It knows it has been fooled . The explains to that the T-1000 can imitate anything of equal size that it has sampled previously by physical contact . It ca n't become a bomb or a complex structure with chemicals or moving parts ( such as a gun ) , but it can form knives and stabbing weapons . At , a police detective shows some pictures from the police station , taken by a video surveillance camera in 1984 . They show the first on a killing spree inside the station . The detective explains that the unknown man killed 17 police officers with families and children that night . His colleague shows her pictures taken at the mall that day by a tourist : they show the same man . The officers tell her is missing and that his foster parents were murdered , and ask her about the guy in the picture , but she does n't give the slightest response . tells them she is fading out of reality , and lets them out . surreptitiously takes a paperclip from the desk before one of the orderlies takes her back to her cell . tells the about his time in , where hooked up with several guys to gather weapons and teach to become a great military leader . now realizes that she was right all the time , and he wants to rescue her . The refuses , stating that the T-1000 will most likely copy and wait for to come to her . When hears that the subject being copied is typically terminated , he insists on saving her immediately . restrains him , saying is not a mission priority . objects and calls out for help , but when he orders it to let go , the android complies . To his joy , finds out that obeying is one of the 's mission parameters . tests it by ordering it to stand on one foot : it complies . Two guys are responding to 's cry for help . They get into an argument , and has grab one of the guys by his hair . When the other guy attacks , breaks his hand and tries to shoot him ; prevents this from happening and sends the guys away . He tries to explain to why he ca n't just kill people , but the robot does n't understand . orders it to help him save his mother , and they ride on . In the meantime , the T-1000 arrives at and is given access by one of the guards . is restrained to her bed by ( ) , one of the other guards . He humiliates her further , repulsively licking her face , locks her cell and bangs his baton against several cell doors as he leaves . spits out the paperclip she stole and uses it to pick the locks of her restraints and the door lock . The T-1000 comes up at a desk and asks the nurse for . She tells him that other cops have already been with her for an hour , as she sees them coming out . When she looks back at the , she notices that he has gone ; he is nowhere in the hallway . She lets ( ) , one of the guards , through the security door ; he shows the police officers out before he walks over to a coffee machine . But as he steps on the checkered hallway floor , the T-1000 , mimicking the floor , stands up , and slowly copies the shape and image of , who is unaware of his counterpart forming behind him . When he turns around , he is astounded to be facing a copy of himself ( 's identical twin brother ) . Before can react , the T-1000 skewers him through his eye by extruding its finger into an ice pick - like extension , then drags his body into a cleaning room . It takes ' pistol and makes its way to the maximum security wing , walking easily past the other guards and staff . Meanwhile , finds that one of the maintenance rooms has been opened , and that a broom handle has been broken off . As he exits the room , he is clubbed by with the broom handle , dragged and locked into her room . She takes his keys and baton and leaves . She hides from ( actually the ) who is walking in one of the adjacent wings . The T-1000 reverts to its cop form as sneaks up to and an orderly . She beats the orderly unconscious and breaks 's arm . She drugs the orderly with a tranquilizer and fills the empty syringe with drain cleaning fluid . and the arrive at , and makes it swear that it will not kill anyone . When the guard cites the visiting hours , shoots him in the legs , reassuring that the man will survive . They park the motorcycle in the garage . arrives with as her hostage at the security office . She has the poison - filled syringe in his neck , and reassures him that she has no problem killing him , since she already believes they 'll all die on . He orders the guards to open the door . She gets through but does n't notice another guard behind her . He saves from her hands , but gets pushed to the floor . makes a run for it . The guards sound the alarm , which also attracts the attention of the , which just discovered the drugged guard . manages to lock out the pursuing wardens by breaking off a key , so they have to find an alternate route . makes it to the elevators , but to her horror , an old acquaintance walks out : the , her tormentor from the past . With a yell of fear and disbelief , she runs back the other way . is so blinded by panic that she does n't notice 's calls . One of the orderlies who was forced to take a different route suddenly tackles her as the others catch up and try to subdue her . asks the to help his mother . It walks unnoticed over to the wardens who are trying to restrain . She is frantically yelling " He 'll kill us all ! " tries to give a tranquilizer shot , but the grabs the orderlies around him one by one , and throws them all off . crouches down by , who is looking at him and the in utter disbelief . assures her that the is here to help . The says " Come with me if you want to live . " and reluctantly takes its hand . At that moment , the T-1000 appears at the end of the hallway , blocked by a set of bars . It walks through them with ease , its liquid metal pouring through the bars like pudding ( except for its pistol ) . and run to the elevator as the fires several shots at the , which only serve to slow it down . The T-1000 runs past a stunned Silberman , firing , but the serves as a shield again until the elevator doors close behind him . The T-1000 uses its knife - arms to pry the door open , but the quickly fires a point - blank shot , splitting the other 's head apart . The elevator descends as the fuses its head back together . It pries the doors open again and jumps on the roof of the elevator , stabbing its knives through the roof hoping to hit one of its targets . The and fire several shots back through the ceiling before 's shoulder is slashed by one of the thrusts . The elevator arrives at the garage and they all exit . commandeers a police car that is just arriving . The T-1000 has perforated the elevator roof enough to pour itself through a small hole as an amorphous blob of metal . It quickly reshapes into human form , opens the elevator door and gives chase , forcing the to drive away in reverse . They fire several clips and shells at it , but it keeps gaining . After exiting the garage , the spins the car 180 degrees , but this momentary slow - down allows T-1000 to jump and haul itself onto the trunk with its arm - hooks . It smashes the back window and slices at , but the manages to shoot it off the moving car . It gets back on its feet , but stops its pursuit as it realizes it can not keep up with the car on foot . pulls the severed hook from the car 's trunk , and throws it on the street . The T-1000 walks towards it , absorbs the hook back into its foot , and silently walks back to . , , and the drive away at high speed , safe from the deadly T-1000 , at least for now . opens her arms to , apparently to give him a big hug , but she only wants to check him for wounds or bruises . reprimands him for risking his life trying to save her ; he is too important for that . is baffled by 's cold reaction , saying that he just needed to get her out of there , but she bluntly responds that she can take care of herself . asks about the tears in his eyes , but he says it 's nothing . The T-1000 returns on foot to , where the police have arrived . A cop on a motorcycle asks if it is okay . It affirms , and compliments the cop on his nice motorcycle . The three fugitives arrive at an abandoned gas station and hide the car in the garage . The tends to 's shoulder wound , saying that it knows what it is doing because it has detailed files on human anatomy . remarks that this makes it a more efficient killer ; the confirms the notion . in turn removes the bullets from the 's back . asks if it feels any pain , to which the replies that it senses injuries , which could be regarded as pain . It explains that its wounds will heal , which is good according to , because the wo n't be of much use if it ca n't pass for human . The tells that it will last 120 years with its existing power cell ; that its CPU ( central processing unit ) is a learning computer and that it can learn more about being human as it has more contact with humans . Alternative scene : explains to that its CPU is a learning computer , but disables the learning ability when Terminators are sent out alone , with remarking that does n't want it 's infiltrators to do any thinking . When suggests that they can reset the switch , he and operate on the . She removes part of its scalp , opens its metal skull , and removes the chip inside , shutting down the android completely . However , to 's horror , she wants to destroy the chip with a small sledgehammer , because she does n't trust 's new friend . She wants to use this opportunity to disable it , but convinces her that they need it , and that if he is to be a great military leader , she should start listening to some of his ideas for a change . Reluctantly , she concedes , and they reset the switch and reinsert the chip . The keeps watch all night , and at dawn it hot - wires another vehicle . teaches it that some cars have the keys tucked behind the sun visor . To get away from the city as fast as possible , they drive through the desert to one of 's hideouts . notices that the always uses words like " affirmative ; " he teaches it to use more colloquial expressions such as " no problemo , " " eat me , " " hasta , baby , " and " chill out , . " They stop at a gas station for some food . sees how serious his mother is all the time , and he tells the that it could smile once in a while too . To give an example , unsuccessfully attempts to make one of the restaurant attendants smile , then points at a guy at a phone booth smiling . The tries to imitate him , but the result is less than convincing , so advises it to practice in front of a mirror first . sees some children playing with toy guns . He ponders that humans as a species probably wo n't make it ; the comments that it is in their nature to destroy themselves . inquires about who is responsible for building . As they start driving again , the tells her that it is , a high - ranking engineer at , who will invent a new microprocessor that will revolutionize the entire landscape of military computing . computers will completely replace human functions and decisions in strategic defense systems as the program goes on - line on 4th , 1997 . It learns at such a fast rate that it becomes self - aware on 29th . As the humans try to shut it down , starts a nuclear strike that plunges 's nations into a nuclear war , in which the humans destroy each other . asks for everything the knows about . At the residence , is frantically working at his computer , though he promised his wife ( ) to take the children out swimming . Miles tries to explain to her that his work on the new microprocessor is very important and that he is very close to completing it . jokingly wonders why they started a family anyway , since he seems more concerned with his project . Miles finally gives in and takes the kids out to play . , and the arrive at a ranch in the desert that seems abandoned . However , her friend ( , being very suspicious of unannounced visitors , comes out of hiding at the sound of her voice . He welcomes , , and the ( who introduces as ) and tells them that they are all over the news as wanted persons . is not too thrilled to hear that has come to collect most of his stuff -- clothes , food and a truck -- and she orders and the to gather weapons . The opens a secret stash filled with lots of weapons and ammunition . notifies about her plans to cross the border after nightfall , and tells him to leave the range as well , since it is dangerous for him too . He expected that would bring trouble , but he seems to be used to it . While working in the weapons stash , tells how he grew up learning about weapons and explosives , and how he had a hard time adjusting to a normal life after got arrested . He learns from the that it has no fear of death , nor feels any other emotion about it ; it just has to stay functional until its mission is complete . thinks about himself the same way , although he is not too keen about the important role he has yet to play . The uncovers a minigun , which makes even the android smile . While helping the repair a truck , wonders about his real father , who he will meet when he is in his forties , but who has n't even been born yet . thinks still cries about him sometimes . asks him why people cry . says it happens when people are hurt , although not physically . The machine does n't understand . When the truck works again , teaches how to do a high five ( and the " too slow " joke that accompanies it ) , as watches them from a distance . She narrates : " Watching with the machine , it was suddenly so clear . The would never stop , never leave him , never hurt him , never shout at him or get drunk and hit him , or say it was too busy to spend time with him . It would always be there , and it would die to protect him . Of all the would - be fathers who came and went over the years , this machine was the only one who measured up . In an insane world , it was the sanest choice . carves at a wooden table with her knife and watches playing happily with his family . She falls asleep , and finds herself in a green pasture , behind a fence . On the other side , children are playing in a playground . She tries to warn them away , but no sound comes from her mouth . She sees a younger , innocent version of herself among the people : dressed in her old waitress uniform , playing with infant , when she seems to take notice of a strange pulse . As pounds the fence in frustration , a blinding white flash illuminates the area . People scream in terror as the bright light dies down , revealing a huge nuclear cloud column at the horizon . In an instant , temperatures rise to extremes , causing , everyone and everything to spontaneously burst into flames . A panoramic shot shows a nuclear shock wave propagating through downtown , turning every building in its path into instant rubble . Cars , buses , buildings , and trees are singed and blown to pieces , and as the fire reaches the burnt people , their ashes spread like black dust in the wind . As the fire burns 's flesh away , leaving only her skeleton hanging by the fence , she wakes up with a shock , realizing it was a dream . She looks at the words she just carved into the table : NO FATE ; she knows that she can only stop her dream from becoming reality if she acts immediately . sticks the knife into the table , gathers an rifle and her gear , and gets into the car . sees it , and hears from that he and the are supposed to proceed towards the south , where will meet up with them tomorrow . runs towards , but she drives off quickly without a word or looking back . reads the words on the table : NO FATE . explains to the that it was a message from his future self to , passed on by his father : The future is not set . There is no fate but what we make for ourselves . When the guesses that intends to change the future , suddenly realizes that she is going after . They take off after her in the repaired truck . As races ahead , the warns that the T-1000 has the same data and might be waiting for them at 's house , but is intent on stopping . The suggests that 's death might actually prevent the war from happening , but does not want to hear about it . He angrily admonishes the for still not understanding the value of human life , and insists that it try to learn . At the residence , sets up her silenced gun behind the swimming pool , where she can see working at his computer , unaware of the danger outside . 's son ( ) is playing in the house with his remote - controlled car , waving off his mother 's orders to go to bed like his sister . Outside , loads the rifle and takes aim , pointing a red laser at the back of 's head . At the moment of firing , drives the remote car against ' foot , making him quickly bend over to pick it up . The bullet misses him and hits the computer screen . As realizes the shot came through the window , fires again but misses . Miles takes cover behind his desk , so rakes the house with rapid fire . warns away his wife and son as reloads and empties another clip into the room . She takes a handgun and walks to the house . sees her and makes a run for his living room . fires several shots at him , and the third one hits in the shoulder . He collapses to the floor as his wife and son get to him . tries to force them away at gunpoint , but the young boy stays , pleading for his father 's life . Miles pushes the boy away to his mother , asking to let the boy go , but her eyes are wild with rage . She raves at the bewildered man that everything is his fault and that she will not let him do it . Miles starts to cry uncontrollably , and realizes what she is about to do ; she does not pull the trigger . She backs away and sinks to the floor , crying . and the enter the ravaged house , fearing that they are too late . takes care of his mother and tells the to check on . is traumatized , realizing that she nearly killed a man , and hugs her , assuring her that they will find a way . Finally she is able to tell him she loves him , and he returns her affection . The diagnoses 's injury as a flesh wound and instructs to stop the bleeding by putting pressure on the wound . Miles asks and the who they are . gives the a switchblade , tells it to show what it is , and takes away to his room . With gasps and cries of horror and disbelief , and watch the make large cuts in its arm , and remove the skin to reveal a sophisticated , bloody metal arm and hand , the same kind Miles saw on display at . The requests that and listen carefully . narrates : " listened while the laid it all down . , , the history of things to come . Its not every day that you find out you are responsible for 3 billion deaths . He took it pretty well . " Miles is taken aback by the story , but tries to defend himself against accusations for things he has not even done yet by asking how he was supposed to know . sneers that this is the excuse of all men , thinking they are great and creative , while inventing nothing but death and destruction . cuts off the discussion as it wo n't get them anywhere . Miles tells them he will stop working on the processor and quit his job at , but and the convince him that nobody must be allowed to finish his work ; the lab and all relevant files in his home must be destroyed also . Miles tells them about the chip at , which came from the first , although he was not informed about its origin at the time ; this confirms all of 's suspicions about the factory covering up the whole incident with her and the first . The chip was broken , but it gave the inspiration for his revolutionary new chip design . Miles offers to help them pass 's security to completely destroy the remnant chip and all traces of his work . While driving to , narrates : " The future , always so clear to me , had become like a black highway at night . We were in uncharted territory now , making up history as we went along . " The group arrives at the lab headquarters , packed with large bags full of equipment . Miles gets them through the main entrance to the security desk , and tries to convince the guard that they are friends who he wants to show around . As the guard scolds him for bringing visitors without special authorization , they draw their weapons and restrain him . They use an elevator to move to the second floor , where explains how they need his key and another one in the security station to open the vault holding the chip and arm . Meanwhile , another guard returns to the front desk and grumbles at his partner for leaving the desk unattended , only to find the man tied up and gagged inside the toilet . Miles and enter the security station as the guard triggers the silent alarm . Miles ' access card no longer opens the key locker ; the alarm has neutralized all codes inside the building . He wants to abort , but convinces him they have to complete their mission . assures them that he can open the safe and gets his decoder out . The two guards downstairs have identified and the as the two wanted criminals from the news ; they call the police and ask for all police units in the area . Miles ' entry code wo n't open the door to the lab , so the suggests using his , which means blowing through the door with a grenade launcher . This sets off the fire extinguishing system , which displaces all oxygen to put out the fire . and wait to enter the lab until the dissipates , but the walks through the lab and retrieves two breathing masks for them . They enter the lab and get to work . The T-1000 arrives at the residence appearing as a motorcycle cop , wearing a helmet and reflective sun glasses . He finds the house deserted , all of the computers destroyed , and a garbage can full of burning paper . His police radio broadcasts a call for all units to respond to , and describes the suspects : , escaped from the night before ; and a white male , the possible killer from the massacre in 1984.The chops up several computers and servers with a fire axe . Miles directs to all the disks and processors containing important data that must be destroyed . tells him they will blow it all up . Then sees the enlarged model of his new chip design . He asks the for the axe , says he worked a lot of years on the model , then smashes it apart with a violent strike of the axe . A large police force arrives at , surrounding the building while a police helicopter hovers outside , shining its spotlight inside a deserted office area . opens the key locker and retrieves the vault key . As he leaves , he narrowly avoids being spotted by the helicopter . A quick glimpse on a monitor shows him the entire police force barricaded outside . and the place barrels of explosive liquids and detonation packs . The gives a remote control , showing him how they are going to set off the explosions . enters the lab with the key , telling the others they have company -- all of the police have arrived . says she will finish up and orders them to go ahead . The says it will take care of the police ; reminds him of his promises , but the reassures him with a simple " Trust me . "The walks to the front of the building and kicks a desk out a window . It ignores the police 's order to surrender and fires a at the police cars below . The helicopter pilot moves away . The minigun empty , uses a grenade launcher to destroy two more vehicles . Its heads - up display indicates no human casualties . turns back into the building and the police open fire with & submachine guns . and reach the vault and open it . breaks the glass cases containing the chip fragment and metal arm . He gloats that they 've got " by the balls . "A heavily armed team enters the building and climbs the stairs to the second floor as and the other three prepare to leave . She gives the gas masks and he and the leave the room . As asks for the detonator , the team bursts into the lab , opening fire . takes cover behind a desk , but is hit several times , and sinks to the floor . tries to get to his mom , but the prevents him from endangering himself . looks at the mortally injured , who holds the detonator in his hand . With a silent expression , he assures her that he will take care of it . waits for the members to reload , fires several shots from her sidearm into the air , and then makes a run for the back of the lab . windows around her break as the team opens fire on her , and she barely rolls herself to cover in the room where the vault is . is following her escape on a monitor and tells the there is no other exit for her there . With a loud thud , it breaks through the wall and pulls in through the hole . It breaks a steel door with another blast of its grenade launcher , and the three make their way through a safer corridor to the elevator . The team advances through the lab towards , who is holding a piece of his chip model above the detonator switch . With heavy dying breaths , he tells the leader that he does n't know how much longer he can hold it up . Realizing the imminent danger , the leader ( ) orders his team to pull back immediately . As , and the get into the elevator , ' rate of breathing becomes slower and slower . Finally , it stops , and he drops the part onto the trigger . An enormous explosion erupts from the building , destroying the entire lab . The elevator comes to an abrupt halt on the first floor . The T-1000 arrives on its motorcycle between the burnt - out car wrecks in front of the building . The elevator doors open and the checks the lobby , which is full of the team members . They fire tear gas grenades at the elevator , which forces and to buddy - breathe with the only remaining gas mask . tells them to stay there ; it will be back . It advances towards the team , ignoring their leader 's orders to lie down on the floor . They open fire , the bullets ripping pieces of flesh from its metal body , but they can not stop its advance . As it closes in on them , it uses its sidearm to shoot the men in the legs ; it uses the gas grenade launcher to disable the remaining two members . The T-1000 drives its motorcycle up one of the staircases of the blown - out building . The exits through the main entrance and fires the remaining gas grenades at the police , disabling the entire force . It relieves two remaining members of their van ( remembering to look for the keys behind the sun visor ) , drives it through the main entrance and picks up and . It takes off at high speed as several police officers fire shots at the . As the T-1000 drives through the destroyed lab , it hears the gunshots and sees the leaving in the distance . When it notices the helicopter flying near the building , it accelerates , jumps its motorcycle out of the building , and grabs hold of the helicopter as the bike crashes to the ground . The dumb - struck pilot watches the break the canopy with its head , pour into the cockpit in its amorphous chrome form and instantly resume its previous appearance . It tells the pilot to get out and he jumps . Now in control of the helicopter , the T-1000 pursues the . In the back of the , buries under a pile of bullet - proof vests , telling him to stay under them no matter what happens . She also covers the 's back windows with vests , as she notices the helicopter closing in ; the tells her it is the . and the exchange automatic weapon fire as the navigates the highway , narrowly missing several cars . It drives under a bridge , but the helicopter simply follows . They pass a large semi , which forces the T-1000 to fly over another bridge . It quickly gains on the van and manages to shoot in the leg . The abruptly stops , causing the helicopter to collide with the back of the van ; it crumbles and crashes violently onto the road . The crash causes one of the 's tires to rip , and the van topples over on the road . The driver of the large truck has come to a halt at the crashed helicopter , as the driver of a pick - up truck comes to check on the tipped - over van . The large truck 's driver is amazed to see the T-1000 appearing unharmed from the wrecked helicopter , but the T-1000 simply skewers him with his blade - hand and mounts the truck . The , and stumble from the ; the pick - up truck driver backs away from the 's large facial wounds , as it sees the large truck emerging from the smoke several hundred yards back ; it reads on the side . The three commandeer the pick - up truck as the 's truck rams a stopped car out of the way in the distance . The drives away as the T-1000 smashes the remains of the ; the pick - up driver barely gets out of the way . uses a T - shirt from the truck to slow the bleeding from 's leg . The tries to stay ahead of the liquid nitrogen truck , but 60 mph is the pick - up truck 's top speed . As binds her leg and howls in pain , the large truck rams the back of the pick - up . The T-1000 tries to crush the pick - up against the side - rail , but another truck coming up ahead forces it to move away . The tells to take the wheel and fires a grenade at the large truck , which takes it slightly off course . The directs to take the off ramp , but the T-1000 follows . narrowly misses another truck as the fires another grenade . It hits the truck on the side ; the truck rams into the pick - up from behind again , causing the to drop a grenade shell . drives the truck through the gates of a steel mill , closely followed by the . The grabs its rifle and climbs onto the hood of the 's truck , where it empties the entire clip into the liquid android . Then it turns the wheel quickly to the left , causing the liquid nitrogen truck to topple over and slide behind and . The holds on to the still moving , tipped - over truck as drives through a hangar - sized steel foundry full of workers . The pick - up truck comes to an abrupt halt when it impales itself on a parked lift - truck , one lifter passing between and his mother . As the sliding liquid nitrogen truck comes screeching into the hangar and crashes against one side of the entrance , the jumps off , rolls himself to safety and comes to a stop against a couple of pipes . The enormous momentum causes the truck to split open in the middle and liquid nitrogen pours from the rupture . As the evaporating nitrogen invades the work area , one of the workers sounds the alarm , prompting everyone to instantly evacuate . , , and the watch the T-1000 clambering out of the truck cabin under a pouring rain of liquid nitrogen . As the android appears from the cloud of vapor , it seems to be moving much more sluggishly than usual . A layer of frost covers the creaking T-1000 as it attempts to walk , but its frozen feet keep sticking to the floor . Its continuous efforts to walk cause the legs to break off at the ankle and knees . Trying to break its fall with its hand , the finds the hand frozen to the floor as well . With a violent pull , it breaks free , snapping off its arm to its own astonishment . A few creaking tweaks and turns follow , and it remains motionless . picks itself up from the floor , points its gun and shoots the frozen android , shattering it into hundreds of small pieces , saying " , baby . gets out of the truck to watch his broken enemy . However , one of the pools of molten metal in the hangar has begun to overflow , and the heat starts to thaw the frozen pieces of the T-1000 . The metal becomes liquid again , and the drops start to coalesce into one big blob . The says they do n't have much time , and helps get up ; the liquid metal blob is already shaping into the familiar human form again . The reloads its grenade launcher with the shell it dropped earlier and helps move . The T-1000 regains its cop form . It follows , , and the on foot as they head deeper into the steel mill . While holding a yellow - and - black striped bar , the T-1000 finds that it has been damaged : its arm has mimicked the striped pattern of the bar . It pulls the hand loose from the bar , changes it back to normal with a flick and starts following its targets again . The leads and through the maze of equipment and machinery in the steel mill . As the T-1000 closes in , there is a glitch going over its surface . Apparently , it has difficulty keeping its current form ; its feet keep taking on the color and texture of the metal floor . , , and the come up at the edge of a molten metal pool , but ca n't stand the heat . They return , but see the T-1000 approaching a few yards ahead . The sends and on their way , despite 's desire to stick together . drags away while the readies its gun and grenade launcher . Its internal processing screen searches for the , which suddenly emerges from the side and kicks away the launcher . There is a nasty and violent fight between the two , in which they pound each other against the metal surfaces around them . The T-1000 is thrown head first against a steel wall , but it quickly morphs itself backwards , ready to fight again . The punches into its head , but its opponent simply liquefies , reforms around the 's fist , launches it against some more walls , and finally forces its arm into a giant gear , trapping it in the large drive - chain . Out of reach , the T-1000 takes on its human appearance again and leaves the behind . and take a few steps towards a platform . The picks up an iron bar and uses it to amputate its arm to free itself . and see the T-1000 already coming up to the platform . lowers along a chain onto a conveyor belt below , but stays behind herself , despite 's desperate calls to come along . reloads her shotgun and fires at the 's head : it leaves a large hole around its right eye , which fills up quickly . It figures out that has escaped . Before can reload and fire another shot , the T-1000 extends one of its fingers and skewers her left shoulder to the wall . It orders to call , but she refuses . It tortures by moving its finger - blade inside her wounded shoulder , telling her that it knows it 's torture method hurts her . It then threatens to pierce her head with its other finger , and repeats the order , but she still does n't comply . At that moment , the takes a slice at the T-1000 with the iron bar , almost chopping off its arm and side . But the T-1000 kicks the back , mends its body and simply pulls the bar out . It pounds the with the bar , throwing the in front of a large suspended beam . The T-1000 uses the beam to crush the against the wall several times , causing its right eye to come out and exposing its red robotic eye and metal skull . The heavily crushed attempts to pull itself away with its remaining hand , towards a lower platform where its grenade launcher still rests . But before it can grasp the launcher , the T-1000 forces the metal bar into the 's chest . It retracts the bar again , but before the can make another attempt at the launcher , the T-1000 forces the bar all the way through it and the grated floor . Electrical discharges erupt from the metal body as the red dot in the 's eye slowly dies and its body goes limp . grabs her shotgun and reloads with the little remaining strength she has . crawls out of the conveyor belt tunnel and hides behind some equipment . The 's mechanical eye seems to come back to life . Its internal processing screen shows that an alternate power route inside the metal body has been found , and the eye becomes fully red . It pulls the iron bar from its body and the floor and grabs the grenade launcher . In his hiding place , hears his mother calling him . He walks several steps and platforms over to her , to find her limping along a wall . She asks for his help , but then another appears behind her , armed with a shotgun . She tells to get out of the way . looks down to see that 's feet have seemingly been fused to the grated floor , and realizes it is the T-1000 ( played by 's identical twin ) . yells " shoot ! " and a large metal hole appears in the - as - 's body . In an instant , the wound closes and the T-1000 morphs back into its familiar cop face . fires a volley of shots at the , which brings it staggering towards the edge of the platform , above one of the molten metal pools . But as it 's one step from falling in , 's shotgun is empty . The T-1000 heals its wounds and fires again , but the gun only clicks . The T-1000 makes a childish naughty - gesture with its finger , then starts advancing on and . They turn around to see the emerging on a conveyor belt , armed with the grenade launcher . They get down , and the fires his grenade into the 's gut . It gives a look of astonishment before the grenade violently explodes inside ; its body is completely burst open , the head and arms hanging from mere threads . Before it can reform itself , it loses its balance and falls screeching into the pool of molten metal . The effect is devastating : as and watch , the splashes and thrashes in the pool , screaming in agony , uncontrollably morphing through the forms it previously adapted : the policeman , , , the motorcycle cop . Desperately screaming and fighting , several more heads and arms pop out of its body . It takes the rough shape of a giant open - mouthed head that turns inside - out , before it finally returns into a terrified face that dissolves in the metal , signaling it 's death . helps the up . It looks like a wrecked car and says it needs a vacation . They look at the molten pool and asks if the T-1000 is dead . The replies that it is terminated . throws the metal arm and the chip in the steel , briefly looking over the small device that started the path to . sighs that it is over , but the reminds her that there is still one more chip which must be destroyed ; it points at its skull . It hands a remote control for one of the electrically operated pulleys , saying that it can not self - terminate and needs to be lowered in the molten steel . refuses to accept and pleads with the to stay with them . When it apologizes and tells him that it has to do it , tearfully orders it not to go . The remains silent for a while , looking in the eyes , and tells him it knows now why he cries ; but it is something it can never do . hugs the android , which shakes 's outstretched hand , then grasps one of the chains . activates the pulley , lowering the into the pool . Its clothes burn as it slowly melts away from below in the hot steel . It looks up to , who is in tears . After the hot metal immerses the face , its hand does a final thumbs - up before it sinks completely out of sight . There is a last look into its internal processing screen , which goes static , and finally blacks out like a TV screen . drops the remote and holds the sobbing to her shoulder . The camera flies over the highway at night again as speaks : " The unknown future rolls towards us . I face it for the first time with a sense of hope . Because if a machine , a , can learn the value of human life , maybe we can too . "Credits roll to the theme music and " You Could Be Mine " by . follow.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The title logo appears on a black background . The scene opens in 's ( ) garage / home laboratory as the camera pan over a large collection of clocks . A robotic tin can opener opens a tin of spoiled dog food and empties the contents into an overflowing dog food bowl marked " " . The television set and radio turn on . On the TV , we see the ending of an advertisement , followed by a woman newscaster announcing the recent theft of a case of plutonium . The front door of the garage opens , and ( ) comes in . calls out , then reaches down to partly lift up the doormat . He places a set of keys under the doormat , then drops it back down . enters the garage , calling out for and whistling for . He comments on the mess the place is in . puts down his skateboard and it rolls along the floor until it hits a hidden box of plutonium . He turns on 's amplifier system , dialing all the settings to maximum . A hum grows louder in the background . plugs his electric guitar into a huge amplifier , pauses , and then plucks a string . The amplifier blows up , the impact throwing back against a bookshelf , which falls , all its contents landing on his head . lifts up his sunglasses and we finally get to see his face . "Whoa ... rock and roll , " he says , when a loud ringing fills the garage . It sounds like a fire alarm , but then turns out to be just the telephone . scrambles off the ground and answers it . It 's , who asks to meet him that night at the at 1:15 a.m. asks him where he 's been all week . says that he has been working . tells him that his equipment had been left on all week . , tells not to hook up to the amplifier . " There 's a slight possibility of overload , " he says . glances at the destroyed amplifier , and says that he 'll keep that in mind . Just then , every single one of the numerous clocks go off at once , chiming loudly , and asks about them . tells him that it 's eight o'clock . is elated at the information , as it means that his experiment has worked and all his clocks are 25 minutes slow .... meaning it really is 8:25 , and is late for school . He exclaims this news into the telephone , slams down the receiver , retrieves his skateboard and rushes out of the garage . gets on his skateboard and skates through the streets , hitching a ride first on a pickup truck and then on another to get through town . arrives outside . He hops off his skateboard and flips it up into his hand . His girlfriend ( ) is waiting for him . She warns him that the principal , ( ) is looking for him . tells her that his lateness is not his fault , because set his clocks slow . suddenly appears at the sound of 's name . He demands to know if is still hanging around with , and hands him and a tardy slip each ; it is 's fourth in a row . warns that is a dangerous nutcase , and if he continues hanging out with him , he 'll get in trouble . also harshly tells that he is a slacker , just like his father . " No ever amounted to anything in the history of ! " he says , bringing his face closer to 's until their noses touch . counters that history will be changing soon . We change to the auditorium , where a band has just finished playing . Four judges sit on chairs before the stage and request the next band . and his band get up on stage and he introduces them as The before launching into the opening bars of a ramped up , of " The of " . One of the judges ( the song 's artist , , in a cameo appearance ) cuts them off and tells them that they are too loud . After school , and are walking through the as a mayoral campaign van drives past , blaring " Re - elect ! " over its loudspeakers . tells about how he doubts he 'll ever get anywhere with his music . tries to reassure him with her opinion that he 's really good , and encourages him to send in his audition tape to the record company , but expresses fear that they 'll reject him . He looks up as a new 4x4 pickup truck is delivered to the dealership across the street , and admires it , musing about taking in it for a weekend trip to the lake . asks if 's mother knows about their plans for the next night . assures her that his mother thinks he 's going camping with the guys , and that she would freak out if she knew the truth . fears his mother was probably born a nun . assures him that she 's just trying to keep him respectable . Their lips come closer , but just as they are about to kiss , a tin can is shoved in their faces by a woman shouting " Save the clock tower ! Save the clock tower ! " The woman asks them to deposit money that will be contributed to a fund to save the clock tower , which has been frozen at 10:04 ever since it was struck by lightning at that exact time on the night of 12 , 1955 . The mayor would like the clock to be replaced , the thinks that it is important part of their heritage and should be left alone . gives her a quarter just to get her to go away . She thanks him and hands him a flyer , before going off to target more unsuspecting passersby . and , now rid of the collection lady , are about to kiss when a car pulls up and beeps its horn loudly . It 's 's father , coming to pick her up . hastily scribbles her number on the back of the clock tower flyer with " Love You ! ! ! " next to that . She gets into the car . looks at the back of the flyer . He smiles . gets back on his skateboard and grabs a police car to tail behind . He makes his way back to his home neighborhood , . lets go of another car and skims down this opening towards his house . As rides up to his house , he passes a wrecked being dropped off by a tow truck . Inside , 's father ( ) is arguing with his supervisor ( ) . is exasperated that loaned him a car without warning him that it had a " blind spot " , leading him to have a head - on collision with another vehicle . insists that he never knew the car had a blind spot . He sees and gives him a weak greeting . weakly asks if 's insurance will cover the damage . scoffs , saying it 's not his car and demands to know who is going to pay for his cleaning bill , since he spilled beer all over his blazer . then asks if he 's finished filling out 's reports . When admits he has n't done them yet , an annoyed taps him several times on the head , reminding that he needs time to retype them because he 'll be fired if he hands in his reports in 's handwriting . He expresses despair that all they 've got in the fridge is " light " beer , and helps himself to a beer before leaving . After leaves , hesitantly admits to that he is n't good at confrontations . asks about the car , which he had been planning to drive up to the lake with . apologizes , saying he is n't good at confrontation . The whole family later sits down to dinner - , his wife ( ) , and their children , ( ) and ( ) . drops a thin cake onto the table . It says ' Welcome Home , ' , next to a picture of a bird flying out of jail . 's younger brother , ' ' , has failed to make parole , again . chides that he 's an embarrassment to the family . reminds her that everyone makes mistakes in life . During dinner , while watching an episode of the on , begins laughing at it , a very weird , nerdy laugh , while the rest of the family stares at himHaving enough of the conversation , leaves for his job as a cashier , while tells that called asking for him . This upsets , who lectures that ' any girl who calls a boy is just asking for trouble . ' When tries to defend , grows upset , insisting that when she was 's age she never ' chased a boy , or called a boy , or sat in a parked car with a boy . ' asks how she 's supposed to meet anyone if she is to go through life like did . explains that it will happen just like she met . rolls her eyes , as once again relates the story of how they met : supposedly , was up in a tree ( just what he was doing , has never explained ) , when he slipped , fell into the street and was hit by 's father 's car . After taking him inside , and taking care of him , felt sorry enough for that she asked him to the Under The , which happened to be the same night the lightning bolt struck the clock tower . When they had their first kiss at the dance , she knew she was going to spend the rest of her life with him . starts once again with his weird , nerdy laugh at the TV while the family just stares at him in disbelief . Sometime after midnight , is wakened by a call from , who asks to stop by the lab and pick up the video camera that he forgot . does so , and heads to the . When he gets there , he finds 's van sitting in the parking lot , with his dog , , sitting nearby . When greets , the rear of the opens up , and a heavily modified sedan is backed down the ramp . The driver 's door lifts up , and emerges from the vehicle , greeting , then instructs to start recording . Doc places in the and buckles him in , having note the exact time on the watch around 's collar , and in 's hand . Both are synchronized to the same time . then closes the 's door , and pulls out a remote control , that he uses to maneuver the around the parking lot . When the vehicle is a specific distance away , puts its brakes on , and starts ramping up its speed , before turning off the brakes , sending the streaking right towards him and . Suddenly , a bright light is seen from inside the , as additional fire and lights are set off around it , and suddenly , upon hitting 88 miles per hour , the car vanishes in a puff of light and electricity , leaving a pair of fire trails behind from the red - hot tires . excitedly cheers about the speed his vehicle reached , but is in shock , as it seems that has just disintegrated . excitedly exclaims that is perfectly fine and that he sent into the future ... " one minute into the future , to be exact ! " He also remarks excitedly that he built the time machine out of a because it has style and because the stainless steel body panels were a good conductor for the flux energy that propels the car through time . As if on cue , exactly one minute later , suddenly yanks aside and the materializes where it disappeared , still traveling at the same speed as it was before , and screeches to a stop , now iced over . As opens the door , is revealed to be alive and well , with his watch now one minute behind 's . explains that likely believes that the trip was instantaneous , unaware of any change in time at all , skipping over that minute to instantly arrive at this moment and time . Doc shows a device in the cabin called the " flux capacitor " . It 's the addition that makes time travel possible . Doc explains that , after an accident in his bathroom in 1955 where he hit his head , he had a vision of the flux capacitor . Though it took 30 years of research and most of his family 's fortune to develop it ; the project is a success and Doc plans to travel through time . As he talks to , absently sets the vehicle 's destination time to that date , 5th , asks what the runs on instead of gasoline , tells him it needs plutonium , explaining that a nuclear reaction is necessary to generate 1.21 gigawatts to power the flux capacitor . is alarmed , asking where the could possibly have gotten such a substance and tells him that he hired a couple of Libyan terrorists to steal it for him with the promise of building them a bomb . , however , cheated them , delivering a fake bomb.\\nDoc has don a radiation suit while he loads another pellet of plutonium into the . begins his farewell address to and the camera , but he 's interrupted when a races into the parking lot . A man pops out of the roof with an and begins shooting . Doc yells for to run ; in the are the that cheated . Doc tries to hide as well but the ' van comes to a stop in front of him . Doc throws away his revolver , showing that he intends to surrender , only for the Libyan to shoot him to death . screams and tries to hide but is found as well ; when the Libyan tries to shoot him , his rifle jams . jumps into the and races off , the van close behind . As swings back into the parking lot , he decides to see if the can do 90 mph . Switching to an launcher , the Libyan takes aim at the . As he races towards a photo kiosk , fails to see the speedometer creeping toward 88 mph or the fact that the time clock is set to 5 , 1955 . Suddenly , there is a flash of light and the kiosk and parking lot are replaced with an empty grassy field . The mall does n't exist in 1955 and instead the space is taken up by the , whose owner made valiant efforts to grow pine trees on the property . has barely registered the change of scenery when the plows through a scarecrow . This startles , who loses control of the , and crashes into 's barn where his cows are housed . The noise wakes up the in the farmhouse next door and they come outside to investigate the noise . When they open the barn doors , they are shocked at what they find : what appears to be an airplane without wings has crashed on their property . 's son decides that the is actually an alien spaceship , showing his family a comic book depicting an alien arrival as proof . Just then , the driver 's door lifts up and climbs out , still clad in his radiation suit . Peabody and his family scream in terror , thinking is an alien , and flee towards the house . tries to apologize for the damage , when suddenly Peabody returns with a shotgun and begins shooting at him . jumps back in the and speeds out of the barn , continuing to shoot at him . As flees down the dirt path leading to the road , he inadvertently plows through one of two small pine trees protected by a picket fence . Peabody shoots at the car , in the process destroying his own mailbox , shouting , " You space bastard ! You killed my pine!"Marty reaches the main road and speeds off , muttering that the experience must be a nightmare , heading for home . When he gets to , he finds the stone gates marking the entrance to the neighborhood , but to his surprise , instead of a street lined with houses , there is just an empty grassy field with several construction vehicles sitting idle , torn up dirt where the street is to be paved , and a large billboard advertising the future housing development which will be breaking ground in the next month . , still clad in his radiation suit , sees a car coming along the road and attempts to hitchhike , but the occupants are scared by 's suit and continue driving . Discovering that the wo n't start , removes his radiation suit and pushes the back behind the billboard to hide it from passing motorists , then notices a sign reading " : 2 Miles . about an hour or so , is able to make it to downtown . of 1955 is a lot different to . The courthouse square is an actual garden instead of a parking lot , and contains a memorial to veterans of the . The movie theater is showing sotapolulla ( 1954 ) instead of a porno film . The town 's record store advertises new records : 16 Tons by and The of by . The station is a full service station where attendants not just fill up the tank but also wash the windows and check the customer 's engine and tires . A mayoral campaign car drives around the square , blaring announcements on loudspeakers to remind residents to " ! " Most importantly , the clock tower is still functioning , as indicated when is surprised to hear its half hour chime . still believes that he is in a dream , but realizes this is reality when he picks up a newspaper tossed into a trash can and sees the date " 5 , 1955 " on the top of the paper . steps into 's ( which will be the outlet for an aerobic class in 1985 ) , at this point only inhabited by , the owner , and another customer eating breakfast at the counter . goes to the phone booth and looks up 's address in the phone book , tearing the page out so he can look it up later . As tries to ask for directions , demands that either order something or leave . gets himself some decaf coffee after misunderstandings about and . What does n't realize , as is setting the coffee cup down , is that the customer he 's sat down next to is his future father . He only realizes this when shows up with his friends , and 3D , to harass . has been forcing to do his homework , something has been slacking off on . When admits that he has n't completed 's homework , figuring that it is not due until , gets annoyed , and raps on the head , reminding that he will get expelled if he hands in his homework in 's handwriting . finally agrees to finish up 's work and hand it over the next day , and and his friends leave . After and his friends leave , the diner 's busboy , ( ) , chides for letting harass him all day . insists that is bigger than him , while points out that he does n't expect to spend the rest of his own life working as a busboy , and he plans on becoming someone famous one day . immediately recognizes and before realizing it , blurts out to that he 's going to be mayor in 1985 . This plants the idea in 's mind and he begins to think about how as mayor of , and how he will clean up the town ( to which chafes " A colored mayor ? That 'll be the day " , gives a broom , and tells him to start sweeping the floor).After leaves the diner , 's curiosity is piqued and he follows him into another neighborhood . He momentarily loses track of him until he finds 's bike parked beneath a tree . He looks up and notices on a tree branch , using a pair of binoculars to spy on a girl getting undressed in her bedroom across the street -- is shocked to find that is a . As he strains to get a better look , suddenly slips and falls out of the tree , landing in the street in front of an oncoming . instinctively rushes out and pushes out of harm 's way . The car slams on its brakes , but it hits , who hits his head on the pavement and is knocked unconscious . gets on his bike and rides away as , the driver , yells to his wife that * another * kid has jumped in front of his car . When comes around , it 's night time and it is raining outside , and he is lying in an unfamiliar bed . His mother 's voice tells him that he 's been out for nine hours . , still semi - conscious , quips about having a dream that he went back in time . 's voice reassures him that he 's safe and sound in 1955 . This prompts to bolt upright just as a lamp is turned on , and he is dumbstruck to see , in 1955 a very attractive teenage girl . Lorraine introduces herself and begins to hit on almost immediately , thinking his name is " " because that 's the brand of underwear is wearing ( and she may have been the one to take his pants off ) . instinctively panics when tries to make advances on him and looks like she is trying to kiss him . Fortunately for , this is interrupted when 's mother calls her down for dinner . At dinner , meets the rest of 's siblings , including her brothers and , her sister , and in the crib nearby , little baby . admits that loves his crib , and cries every time they try to take him out . recognizes as the future prison inmate , and ca n't resist the urge to joke to the baby to " Better get used to these bars , kid ... " The family eats while watching an episode of " The " on the new television set that has just brought home . immediately recognizes the episode they are watching as one he has watched in 1985 , which he explains by saying that he saw it in a rerun , a word that puzzles 's younger brother . asks how to find 's address , which 's father says is over on the east end of town . knows that area as " " , a name that 's father does n't know because wo n't be for another six years . As leaves the house , says that 's an " idiot " & warns that if she ever has a kid like , he will disown her . makes his way over to 's house ( which will be destroyed in a fire sometime in the next 30 years , which is why lives out of his garage in 1985 ) . , who does not recognize , answers the door , with a bandage on his forehead from where he hit his head trying to hang a clock above his toilet ( the incident that gave him the vision of the flux capacitor ) . Without saying a word , he immediately hooks up to his newest invention - a thought reader . Doc determines that comes from a great distance , and wants him to make a donation to the . , tells directly that his time machine works and he is from the future . Doc becomes mildly furious that his crazy contraption does n't work and he takes it off . When tries to convince that he 's from the future , is skeptical , even when shows him his future driver 's license and a family photo . Doc comments that the photo must have been forged as 's hair is missing from the picture . However , is able to convince of the truth by mentioning the wound on his head that prompted the vision of the flux capacitor . To prove that has invented it , has drive him out to the place where he 's hidden the . Doc compares the drawing he made of a flux capacitor and sees the real device installed on the . He is overjoyed that one of his inventions actually works . After returning to 's estate , they manage to plug in 's " portable television studio " to see the video had filmed in 1985 . Doc becomes quite excited and panicky when they reach the point on tape where he will say that time travel requires 1.21 gigawatts of energy from the plutonium to power the flux capacitor . explains that plutonium is very hard to come by in 1955 and that the only energy source capable of that amount of power is a lightning bolt . Predicting the strike zone of a lightning bolt is impossible and tells he may be stuck forever in 1955 . But then remembers the flyer the woman gave him and about the lightning bolt that is going to strike the clock tower at exactly 10:04 PM next night and hands it to . Now that he knows a date and time , begins working on a plan to harness the power of the bolt and send home . When says he can hang out in 1955 for a week , objects , warning him that it could be detrimental to future history and jeopardize his entire existence . He asks if he had any interaction with anyone in the last few hours and drops the bomb about preventing the first meeting between his father and mother . Doc asks to see the photo of and his siblings again ; 's head is now completely gone . This means that in order to go back to 1985 , first needs to make his parents fall in love and have their first kiss within a week . Doc takes to the high school the next morning . is amazed to find that there is no graffiti on the building , unlike in 1985 . After peeping through a classroom window and watching cheating on a test , they spot in the hallway during a passing period , seeing him being picked on ( in part because of the large " KICK ME " note that one of 's gang taped to his back ) . is further demoralized when ( who in 1955 is down to his last dregs of hair ) appears and tells him he 's a slacker . is baffled that could fall in love with someone like , and admits that his best guess is she originally felt sorry for him after her dad nearly killed him . Doc recognizes their relationship as a version of the effect , which happens when nurses develop romantic feelings for their patients . tries encouraging to talk to , however , an attempt to simply introduce them to each other fails because is already smitten with . finds that the situation is more serious than they 'd thought ; lacks the self - confidence to ask out , as he fears that he could n't handle a rejection if she said " no " , and getting them together permanently could be impossible . At lunch , tries again to convince , by saying has been talking about him and that he should ask her to the Under the dance . spends his lunch by himself writing science fiction short stories . asks to read one of them and refuses , saying he 's afraid people would be critical . He also suggests that may want to go with someone else to the dance , namely , who is across the cafeteria , sitting with and trying to grope her . immediately marches over to them and pulls the much larger off his mother . begins pushing , however , , unlike his meek father , begins pushing back and is about to fight when breaks it up . follows home and begins pleading with to ask out . continues to refuse and tells that no one in the world will make him change his mind . That night , sneaks into 's room in his radiation suit , places his headphones on and gives him a blast of ear - splitting guitar riffing . claims he is , an extraterrestrial from the planet , and intimidates into asking out , threatening him with a " brain melting gun " ( actually a hairdryer ) . To keep from calling for his parents , chloroforms him , before jumping out the window and into 's car . The next day , rushes up to at the station , disheveled and frantic , having overslept , while is trying to open a -- pops it open with the bottle hook on the machine . knows he needs to ask out but he does n't know what he should say . takes back to 's diner , where is hanging out with her friends . suggests to that he tell , " has brought me to you . " orders a chocolate milkshake to calm his nerves before approaching . It gets off to a shaky start when , in a fit of nervousness , accidentally mangles the lines gave him . Though seems charmed by him , 's attempt comes to a grinding halt when and his friends come in to toss him out . As demands money from , , sitting at the counter , " accidentally " trips . turns his anger on , and is about to punch him when tricks him into looking away , giving the opportunity to punch and bolt out the door . Once outside , steals a passing boy 's scooter , tears off the crate and turns the bottom into a skateboard . and his goons chase in 's car around the town square . is able to avoid serious injury . While riding on the hood of 's car , he distracts them by suddenly jumping up , jumping over the hood , the windshield and the backseat , and then hopping off onto the waiting skateboard at the rear . and his friends are confused , and then see they are barreling towards a manure truck parked on the curb . They can only shout " ! ! ! ! ! " as the car slams into the back of the truck , which dumps its entire load of manure on them . Watching the chase from the diner , becomes even more attracted to the adventurous . Back at 's shop , the inventor shows how he 'll use the lighting bolt to power the . He 'll string heavy cable from the clock down to the street , building a circuit . A long rod attached to the back of the will channel the energy from the bolt directly into the flux capacitor . The timing will have to be precise . The demonstration goes well , though it sets a garbage pail on fire . As uses a fire extinguisher to put out the flames , they are interrupted by a knock at the door . To 's shock , it 's , who has followed . and quickly cover the with a tarp before letting in . asks if he wants to be her date to the Under The . attempts to back out , suggesting she go with , but balks at the idea , saying a real man stands up for the woman he loves , referring to the fight just had with . suddenly sees a way to get to win 's heart . He approaches while is doing his parents ' laundry , and tells him to find him with in 's car in the school parking lot at a certain time , where plans to appear to " take advantage " of her , which he believes will make her angry . is to pull out of the car and pretend to beat him up , proving that he 's the bigger man . The night of the dance arrives . is already there , in a tux , waiting for his cue , as the all - black band known as the performs on the stage . At 's , writes a letter on a piece of stationary warning . He slips the note into the pocket of 's coat while is in the middle of using $ 50 to bribe a cop who asks him if he has a permit for his " weather experiment" . arrives at the dance in 's car with . As they stop , he asks her if they can " park " for a while . To 's astonishment , produces a small bottle of whiskey and begins to smoke , two bad habits she has in 1985 . warns her she may regret it later and dismisses it , exasperated that sounds like her mother . She also is aggressive in coming on to in the car , much more than had anticipated , though when she kisses rather hard on the lips , she admits afterwards that she feels like she 's kissing her brother . Just then , the door is opened and is pulled roughly from the driver 's seat . But to 's shock , it 's not . Rather , it 's , drunk , and seeking revenge for the $ 300 in damages inflicted on his car in the manure truck accident . When sees in the car , however , he throws to Match , and , climbs into the car , and begins to molest her . , and 3D take out behind the school and toss him into the open trunk of the first car they see , then slam the lid shut . Unfortunately for them , the car belongs to and the . They scare 's gang off and they realize that the keys are in the trunk with . arrives at 's car , opens the door as planned , and delivers the lines told him , but is taken off - guard realizing that he is not only dealing with , but his " rescue " is now the real deal . He takes a half - hearted punch at , who grabs his arm and begins to twist it . When pleades with and tries to intervene , roughly pushes a off and onto the ground and begins laughing , summons up the strength and courage , curls his left hand into a fist , and punches squarely in the jaw , knocking him out . , freed from the trunk thanks to himself , races to the scene just in time to see slump to the ground at 's feet . takes the grateful 's hand and the two go into the dance hall . , knowing that his future is n't sealed until kisses , goes back to the band and finds that is unable to play guitar having injured his hand while freeing from the trunk . agrees to play guitar in 's place and the band strikes up again , playing a romantic song ( " " ) . , already weak because his parents ' love is not confirmed , begins to fade into non - existence when a fellow student cuts in between and on the dance floor , however , regains his courage , takes back and kisses her passionately . is instantly revived and finishes the song and sees his mother and father happily in each others arms . asks to play another number with the band . Reluctant at first , ca n't resist the opportunity and launches the band into " " . While plays , calls his cousin ( the soon - to - be - famous rock n ' roll star ) , telling him that he found the " new sound " was looking for . does 's trademark duck walk , and then gets carried away imitating other guitar heroes - windmilling his arm and kicking over his amplifier in imitation of , lying on the stage kicking his legs in imitation of , playing behind his head like , and tapping in the style of . In the face of uncomprehending stares from the audience , while lost in heavy metal riffing , stops and tells the students " I guess you 're not ready for * that * . But your kids are gon na LOVE it . " turns to leave the dance and runs into and . asks if it 's OK for to take her home and heartily agrees . He also advises them that if they have a son who accidentally sets fire to the living room rug when he 's eight years old , to go easy on him , implying that he 's talking about the town square , waits impatiently for . arrives , saying he needed time to change back into his 1985 clothes . As they prepare for the event , discovers the note from in his pocket . Refusing to know too much about his future , he tears up the note without reading it . Just then , a falling tree limb disconnects the cable he has installed from the clock tower to the street . climbs again to the clock tower and has feed him the cable . also tries to warn about his death but is drowned out by thunder . runs back to the and races off to the starting point has painted for him . While waiting for the timer to go off , wishing he had more time , then realizing that he has all the time we wants because he 's in a time machine , he resets his destination time to arrive 11 minutes earlier than he left so he can warn . Just then , the car stalls and frantically tries to start it again . When it does restart , after the timer goes off , begins speeding toward the town square . Despite some difficulty , reconnects the cable just as the lighting bolt surges through the line and the speeds off into the future , leaving behind a pair of fire trails . Doc celebrates joyously in the street . Thirty years later , at 1:24 AM , a homeless bum is seen sleeping on a bench in the town square when he is woken up by three sonic booms , just as the materializes and slams into the porno theatre just down the block . The bum , , quips " Crazy drunk drivers . " backs the out and turns around , only for the car to promptly ice up from the time travel trip . Just then , the ' blue minibus passes by , driving recklessly . jumps back into the only to have it stall on him again . is forced to run to the mall where the initial experiment is taking place . As he arrives , we see that the sign now reads " , " showing that never regrew the pine tree that destroyed . He sees get shot , again and watches from a distance as the chase his previous self around the parking lot . When the vanishes and 's counterpart goes back to 1955 , the lose control of their van , which and crashes into the photo kiosk & tips on its side , trapping the . runs down to . is devastated that he could n't arrive in time to save . , however , suddenly sits up . is stunned until opens his shirt , revealing that he 's wearing a bulletproof vest . asks him about the consequences of changing the future and the space - time continuum and the admit , " Well , I thought , ' What the hell ! ' " . Doc drives home and tells him he plans to venture about 30 years into the future . He then ramps the up to 88 mph and drives off into the night in a flash of light . wakes up the next morning to find that the furniture in his house is arranged differently . is wearing a suit and working an office job . seems to be having trouble keeping track of all the teenage boys who keep calling her for dates , much to 's exasperation . and arrive home from a tennis match , happy and even a bit frisky . asks about the camping trip he has planned with , to which mentions that the car is wrecked . Everyone starts barking about it until shows them that is waxing the car , a late model , in the driveway . now runs an auto detailing service and now is working for , rather than the other way around . seems amused at 's efforts to get away with as little work as possible ( but now confronts to complete the work he was hired for ; two coats of wax instead of only one ) . jokingly says that he 'll complete the work properly . Moments later , comes into the house carrying a box filled with copies of 's first published book , the cover of which resembles 's appearance in the radiation suit . is unsure how to take everything in when hands him a set of keys . They are for the pickup truck he 'd been thinking about purchasing with back at the beginning of the movie . As goes into the garage and looks at the truck , quite astonished that the future had been altered so dramatically for himself and his family , appears behind . He 's relieved to see her and happy that his family is happier as well . Suddenly there is a burst of electricity and the screeches to a halt . gets out , dressed in wild clothing and tells he needs to come with him to the future ; something is wrong with his and 's kids . Doc gathers " fuel " by rummaging through a garbage can and loads it into a new addition to the car 's engine called . All three pile into the and it backs out of the driveway . tells the he needs to back up further to get up to 88 mph , as they have no road . Doc replies , " Roads ? Where we 're going , we do n't need roads ! " has converted the car to a hovercraft . The car takes off , and flies at the camera ... and the words " To be continued ... " flash on the screen.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > Ten - year - old ( voice : in the 2002 dub ) and her parents ( voices : and ) drive to their new home . is whiny and unhappy about the move , especially when she notices that the bouquet her friend gave her as a good - bye gift is wilting . In sight of their new house , they take a wrong turn and follow a bumpy , decayed old road through the woods ; sees an odd old statue through the trees as they drive by . The road ends at a tunnel leading to an abandoned theme park . It gives the creeps , but her parents persuade her to go in with them and look around . After wandering across a grassy landscape and a dry riverbed , they climb a stone staircase and come to a street lined with restaurants and shops . Most are deserted , but the aroma of cooking leads them to the one restaurant that 's well stocked with food - though it 's mysteriously deserted . Mom and are hungry and start eating , despite 's objections . The food is delicious , and wanders away to explore while they eat . She finds a towering , ornate building that she recognizes as a bathhouse ( a spa resort ) ; there 's a train track running under it . She meets a boy ( voice : ) in traditional dress who is alarmed to see her ; he tells her to leave and get back across the river before it gets dark . runs back to her parents , but they 're still eating - and they 've turned into pigs . Strange , dark , ghostly figures appear in all the shops and streets , frightening and separating her from the pigs that were her parents . runs back to the river , which was nearly dry when they came over but is now full and large , and she does n't even recognize the buildings on the far side . As a riverboat approaches , she notices that her body has become transparent . The riverboat lands a big crowd of people in costume - or maybe they 're not people ; at first they 're only visible as paper masks . thinks she s dreaming , but ca n't wake up . The boy who warned her away finds her and tells her she must eat some food from his world or she 'll fade away . He assures her that she wo n't turn into a pig . She swallows the morsel he gives her and becomes solid , but finds that she 's stuck to the ground until he recites an incantation to release her . A bird with a woman 's head flies above them and he hides her , saying the bird is looking for her . They run through alleys and the pig barn to the big bathhouse , which is accessed by a bridge ; the boy says she has to hold her breath as they cross the bridge or the spell that makes her invisible will be broken . Customers - fantastically varied gods and spirits - are crossing the bridge and being greeted by bathhouse staff . makes it almost all the way across , but a frog ( voice : ) that speaks to her companion ( calling him ) startles her and she takes a breath . Luckily only the frog seems to see her , and uses magic to encase it in a bubble to shut it up . tells her to find ( voice : ) , the boiler man , and make him give her a job ; she must have a job to stay at the bathhouse , or else ( voice : ) , the old witch who rules the bathhouse , will turn her into an animal . And says she has to stay if she wants to find and help her parents , who are still pigs , wherever they are . He knows her name and says he 's known her since she was very small . descends a steep , winding , rail - less wooden stairway in search of and the boiler room . When she finds them , she sees a weird set - up in which the boiler is fed by creatures like spiders ( delivering coal one lump at a time ) and the machinery is controlled by a bearded , bald man with six arms and dark glasses - . She asks for a job , but he says - after grumbling about four bath tokens at once , as four red plaques on purple ribbons descend from the ceiling - that he 's cast a spell on sootballs ( the spider - things ) so he has all the workers he needs . has to keep moving to stay out the way of and the sootballs . She picks up a lump of coal that 's too heavy for the sootball carrying it - and almost too heavy for her - and tells her to finish what she started , so she hauls it over to the furnace and tosses it in . All the sootballs pretend to collapse under the weight of their coal so they wo n't have to work , but scolds them and , saying that if they do n't keep working , the spell will wear off . A young woman comes in with food for and the sootballs . The woman is shocked to see the human everyone is looking for!"-but says she 's his granddaughter and asks the woman to take to , who will give her something to do . The woman , whose name is ( voice : ) , only agrees when offers her a roasted newt ; she brusquely tells to leave her shoes and socks behind and to thank the boiler 's really sticking his neck out for you . "They take three elevators to 's rooms on the top floor , seeing many of the bathhouse 's clients - calls one a radish spirit - between elevators . An elevator operator who has n't spotted tells she smells just like a human . distracts him with the roasted newt that gave her while escapes in the last elevator with the radish spirit . They arrive at a courtyard - like room with a mosaic floor and two big front doors ; tries to open one . The door knocker says , " are n't you even going to knock ? You 're the most pathetic little girl I 've ever seen ! " The doors open and the same voice ( 's - tells her to come in ; she 's pulled through the house into a fire - lit room in which several disembodied green heads bounce around , and , an old woman with a huge head , works at a desk . asks for a job , but calls it foolishness , makes disparaging remarks about , and silences her with magic . She smokes a cigarette as she considers what to do with . She lifts the silencing spell to ask who helped her , but only continues to ask for work , which makes angry . When persists , offers , " maybe I 'll give you the most difficult job I 've got and work you until you breathe your very last breath . " They 're interrupted when 's enormous baby , B\\xc3\\xb4h ( voice : ) wakes up , which blames on . keeps asking for work and finally agrees to give her a job if she 'll be quiet . signs a contract while grouses , " I ca n't believe I took that oath to give a job to anyone who asks . " , observing that is a pretty name , magically lifts all but one of the characters of 's name from the contract and says that the name belongs to her now . Reading the one character that remains of 's name , says " from now on , your name is " ( pretending not to know her ) comes to show her what to do . He says she must address him as . None of the workers want to take / into their department , complaining that she smells bad , but says her smell will be gone after three days of eating their food . assigns / to work with because had been asking for an assistant . takes to their room , which they share with several others , and gives her clothing ( a blue apron and pink shirt and pants ) . asks if there are two . says no , and that must be careful what she says to because he 's 's henchman . does n't feel well . turns into a bird with a human head and flies off her balcony with a smaller but otherwise identical human - headed bird . As lies sleeping among her new coworkers , a voice ( 's ) says " meet me at the bridge ; I 'll take you to your parents . " She wakes up , dresses in her new clothes , and goes down to the boiler room where she left her shoes . When she observes " my shoes are gone , " the sootballs bring them out of the tunnels where they live . makes her way out to the bridge , where a semitransparent spirit is standing . It wears a white mask and a black robe . Silently , it watches her cross ; it was standing in the same spot in the middle of the bridge when she crossed the night before . finds her at the other side and leads her through flowering shrubs to the huge piggery . He says she must never come there without him . She identifies a couple of sleeping pigs - there are hundreds - as her parents , and promises to help them . says she must remember which pigs are her parents . He gives her back her old clothes , which she 'll need to escape , and a card with her real name , , which has almost forgotten already . ( She called herself when she spoke to her parents . ) says exerts power over people by stealing their names ; she must not forget hers as he has forgotten his . He gives her something to eat . She cries as she eats and he tries to comfort her . Then has to go ; he leaves her at the bridge . When she turns back to look for him , she sees a dragon flying away and realizes that it 's . Later , finds asleep on the floor of the boiler room ; he covers her up . - and her smaller companion fly home through heavy rain . Inside the bathhouse , asks where she was ; apologizes but does n't explain . , , and other girls wash a floor until a man comes to say they get the big tub today , though the women do n't usually get that kind of 's frog work , " as says . As dumps her pail out the garden door , she sees the silent spirit from the bridge standing outside in the rain looking in . She asks if he 's getting wet and leaves the door open for him ; he follows her in . They discover that the big tub is encrusted with crud and will need to be soaked before they can clean it properly , so sends to the foreman ( voice : ) for an herbal soap token . Far above in her apartment , senses something approaching . She looks out and wonders who is slinking around in the rain . A spirit that looks like a pile of mud is making its way toward the bathhouse . The foreman refuses to give a soap token , but the silent spirit liberates one for her . As they fill the big tub to soak it clean , says the water contains salts that are supposed to be good for you . The silent spirit ( voice : again ) approaches and offers a handful of soap tokens . ( He 's not completely silent ; in this scene he makes little " ah ah " sounds , as if he 's trying to talk . ) When she politely turns them down , he seems disappointed and lets the tokens fall to the floor . She 's distracted when the big tub overflows . Meanwhile , has identified the walking mudpile as a stink spirit , though she 's suspicious that he is n't really . The staff fails to fend him off , so assigns to take him to the big tub and bathe him . can hardly speak because he smells so bad . He 's surrounded by a pool of purple stinkiness . He gets in the big tub , which overflows with his brownish slime . and the foreman watch as tries to clean the stink spirit . She uses the silent spirit 's herbal soap tokens to order up some good , cleansing hot water . As arrives to help , feels something like a thorn in the 's side . decides this is important and gives rope to tie to the thorn ( which has a handle ) ; with help from all the staff , they pull a bicycle out of the spirit 's body , followed by an entire junkyard . ( has said that this part of the story is autobiographical - he once pulled a bicycle out of a polluted , litter - clogged river . ) When the slime clears , an ancient - looking brown face with shaggy eyebrows appears and says " well done " to He seems to disappear , leaving her with a handful of something greenish . Then he explodes out of the tub like a giant white snake - or perhaps a dragon ( he resembles 's dragon flies away , leaving lots of gold behind . is delighted . The guest was a river spirit in distress , not a stink spirit . sees the silent spirit sitting in the corner , apart from all the excitement . At bedtime , and sit on their balcony eating dumplings . When asks about , says the word is he does 's dirty work . They watch a train go by on the water . ( Or so it seems ; with all the rain , the water has risen so it just covers the tracks . ) says she has to get out of that I 'm getting on that train . " tastes the green stuff the river spirit gave her , but finds it very unpleasant . That night , the frog who first saw on the bridge goes into the room with the big tub and meets the silent spirit , who lures him closer with little gold nuggets . The spirit eats the frog , and thereafter uses his voice . He asks another employee for food and pays with more gold , which seems to grow in his hands as needed . takes the river spirit 's gift to the piggery , thinking it might turn her porky parents human , but she ca n't tell which pigs are her parents . Back at the bathhouse , shows a lump of gold from " a new guest here who 's loaded . " The formerly silent spirit is eating everything the staff can bring him , growing larger and uglier , and dispensing gold . goes to look for . A white dragon that recognizes as flies across the water , lands with a splash , and then seems to be attacked by white birds . opens her balcony doors so the dragon can fly into her room and closes the doors on the birds , which turn out to be made of paper . The dragon is bleeding , but flies out and up to a higher window . , worried , goes after him ; one of the paper birds attaches itself to her back . She runs into the formerly silent spirit , who is glad to see her and offers her gold ; she declines and the spirit , disappointed again , drops the gold , which is eagerly snatched up by the other employees . The spirit eats the staffer who was conducting him through the halls and another employee . Has 's rejection of his gifts turned him evil?Sen finds herself climbing up the outside of the towering bathhouse . She notices that she has some of 's blood on her hand . The paper bird moves from her back to her hair ; turns to see the - bird flying back into her rooms at the top of the bathhouse . tries to get in through a window ; the paper bird slips through and unlocks it for her . She goes through a bathroom down a hall to a playroom , where the paper bird enables her to hear , who complains into the phone that the problem guest is a no - face spirit who 's eating people and that is bleeding all over the carpet . She callously tells someone to " get him out of here - he'll be dead soon anyway . " comes to the playroom ( where is still hiding ) and digs through the cushions to find the big baby . When leaves , the baby , , grabs and accuses her of being a germ from outside , come to make him sick . ( He never leaves his room so he wo n't get sick . ) He threatens to break her arm if she wo n't play with him , so she shows him 's blood on her hand-"germs!"-and he lets go . goes out to the main room , where lies bleeding in dragon form . B\\xc3\\xb4h follows and again demands that play with him . The paper bird turns into a woman who looks just like . She turns the baby into a mouse when he mistakes her for his mother . She also turns the smaller - bird into a tiny , bug - like bird and turns the three green heads into a facsimile of the big baby . The woman explains she 's ( voice : again ) , 's twin sister . She says stole her magical golden seal , and she wants it back . The seal carries a curse that says will kill anyone who steals it . She says he 's a thief - he not only took 's seal , but plans to steal 's magic as well . snaps his tail and shreds the paper bird , which is lying on the rug ; this action slices in half from top to bottom . " Oh , a paper cut , " she remarks as she falls apart . and fall through a hole in the hearth down a long shaft , almost landing among some evil - looking spirits before , still in dragon form , revives enough to fly them to the boiler room . Once there , collapses ; he 's still bleeding . says it looks serious - he seems to be bleeding from the inside . makes him eat part of the river spirit 's gift . He thrashes and struggles and spits up 's gold seal and a black slug , which steps on and kills . changes back to human form , but he 's still ill and unconscious . takes the seal . says , like , appeared at the bathhouse out of nowhere and became pale - faced and steely - eyed once took him as her apprentice and got control of him . He thinks might be able to help if asks , though is very dangerous ; agrees . She says helped her , and now she wants to help him . " I guess my parents will have to wait , " she says a little glumly . comes to say that the silent spirit is a monster called No - face who has swallowed three people ; admits that she let him in , though implies she 'll get in big trouble for it . gives train tickets - a rare treasure - to go to 's house at . He says the train only runs one way now , though it used to go in both directions ; will have to walk back along the tracks . When wonders what 's going on with and , says " Something you would n't recognize . It 's called love . " Meanwhile , No - face is calling for tells to get every last bit of gold out of No - face , who has grown huge and bloated , before evicting him from the bathhouse . Before goes in to see No - face , asks " what 's that dirty mouse doing here?"-she does n't recognize the mouse as her baby . No - face offers gold again , confiding , " I 'm not giving it to anybody else . " She tells him she wants to leave because she has somewhere important to go , and that he should leave too because does n't want him in the bathhouse . She asks if he has somewhere to go . He does n't ; he complains that he 's lonely . No - face says he wants - meaning he wants to eat her . She makes him eat the remainder of the river 's gift instead , and it causes him to vomit uncontrollably ( on , at one point ) . runs away and gets him to follow her down many flights of stairs . At the foot of the stairs , No - face coughs up a couple of the people he ate ( who seem fine ) , and says " I 'll get you for this , " He shrinks down to his original size . turns up in a tub - like boat to take to the train station . calls No - face to follow her to the train , saying he needs to get out of the bathhouse because it 's making him crazy . She 's sure he wo n't hurt them . No - face coughs up the frog , who swims away . The train comes ; and No - face go aboard , presents their tickets to the conductor , and they ride to , where lives . Many of the passengers are transparent , and No - face has reverted to transparency as well . The mouse ( formerly the baby ) and the bug - bird are with them . The train travels over a landscape that 's nearly all water . In the boiler room , wakes up and wakes , who explains that has gone to 's and that she broke 's spell and cured him with the power of pure love . In 's room , the faux big baby ( actually the three green heads ) is eating while sits nearby with some of No - face 's gold . comes in and says that something precious to her has been replaced ; when looks closely , the baby turns back to the three heads and the gold turns to dirt . says , " the baby is with your sister . " asks what he wants to get the baby back . must tear up 's contract and return her with both parents to the human world , replies . agrees , but only if can pass a final test . " If she fails , she 's mine!"Sen and No - face get off the train and go looking for . There 's a dry path to walk on . The bug - bird and the mouse take turns carrying each other but get tired , so lets them ride on her shoulder . A hopping lamppost leads them through the dark to 's house . The door opens and brusquely invites them in . still looks just like . She invites them to sit while she makes tea . gives back the golden seal and apologizes for . says " he sliced me in two , you know , and I 'm still angry . " thinks she 's talking about the slug , which she admits to having squashed , but says the slug was how controlled . Only love could have broken 's spell . says the spell on the mouse and the bug - bird wore off long ago and they can change back whenever they want . They 're busy with a spinning wheel , however , and show no interest in changing . says must help her parents on her own ; to do that , she must remember where she first met asks to call her Granny . ( has become quite kindly . ) No - face spins and the mouse and bug - bird knit a hair - tie for ; says it will protect her because her friends made it for her . The door rattles and tells to let in another guest : it 's in dragon form . says she 'll forgive if he takes care of asks No - face to stay with her-"I need a good helper"-and No - face agrees . tells Granny her real name , climbs on 's back with the mouse and bug - bird , and they fly off . As they fly , she remembers dropping her shoe in a river when she was very small , going in after it and fearing she would drown , but the river carried her to shore . It was the . is the spirit , and ca n't find his way home because the river has been filled in . changes from dragon to human , and for a while they enjoy free fall . and fly in human form , landing at the bathhouse bridge . The mouse turns back to a baby , who speaks up on 's behalf . wants to give the final test , though the baby objects , but agrees that " a deal 's a deal . "The test : must pick out her parents from a crowd of pigs . " You get one try ; if you get it right you can all go home . " says none of the pigs are her parents ; she passes the test and her contract evaporates out of 's hand . Saying " thanks for everything , " ( which surprises , because she never asked to be called ) , runs off with , who tells her her parents are on the other side of the river . She has to cross the riverbed and not look back until she 's through the tunnel . He 'll go back to , though no longer in her thrall because he knows his name again . He promises that he and will meet again . Sen - now - hears her parents calling and rejoins them near the tunnel mouth ; they 're fine and do n't remember any of what happened . They scold her mildly for running off . When they get back to their car , it 's dusty and covered with leaves , as though it had been there for a long time . As they drive away , says " a new home and new school - it is a bit scary . " , much matured since her last car ride , replies , " I think I can handle it . "</synopsis > 

 < Pianist " begins in , in , 1939 , at the outbreak of the , first introducing ( ) , who works as a pianist for the local radio . The has been defeated in three weeks by the and 's radio station is bombed while he plays live on the air . While evacuating the building he finds a friend of his who introduces him to his sister , . is immediately attracted to her . Wladyslaw returns home to find his parents and his brother and two sisters , packing to leave . The family discusses the possibility of fleeing successfully and they decide to stay . That night , they listen to the and hear that and have declared war on . The family celebrates , believing the war will end quickly once the Allies are able to engage . Conditions for in quickly deteriorate . meets with , who accompanies him around to learn of the injustice Jewish people have to face under the new regime . Businesses that were once friendly to them now wo n't allow their patronage . 's father is harshly forbidden to walk on the sidewalk in the city by two German officers ; when he begins to protest , one of the officers hits him in the face . The family soon has to move to the Jewish ghetto established by rule . The is starting , and the family , though well - to - do before the war , is reduced to subsistence level , although they are still better off than many of their fellow in the overcrowded , starving , disease - ridden ghetto . Wladyslaw takes a job playing piano at a restaurant in the ghetto , turning down an offer from a family friend to work for the Jewish , and the family survives , but living conditions in the ghetto continue to worsen and scores of die every day from disease , starvation , and random acts of violence by German soldiers . One night the family sees the into a house across the street and arrest a family . The eldest man is unable to stand when ordered because he is confined to a wheelchair and the officers throw him over the balcony to his death . The other family members are gunned down in the street and run over by the truck if they survived . By 1942 , the aged father must apply for working papers through a friend of 's , so that he can take a job in a German clothier . However , the day comes when the family is selected to be shipped to their deaths at the concentration camp . and are selected and taken away and the rest of the family is sent to the to wait for transport . They are later reunited . As the family sits under the blazing sun with hundreds of other waiting for the trains , the father uses the family 's last 20 zlotys to buy a piece of candy from a boy ( who apparently is n't aware of his own impending doom ) . Each family member eats a tiny morsel of candy , their last meal together . As they are going to the trains , is suddenly yanked from the lines by , a Jewish man working as a police guard . Wladyslaw watches the rest of his family board the train , never to be seen again . He hides for a few days in the cafe he played piano in with his old boss there . He later blends in with the ten percent or so of the that the kept alive in the ghetto to use for slave labor , tearing down the brick walls separating the ghetto and rebuilding apartment houses for new , non - Jewish residents . He is put to work , under grueling , abusive conditions , rebuilding a bombed - out building . He thinks he sees an old friend ( a singer ) , but she passes quickly . He learns that some of the are planning an uprising , and helps them by smuggling guns into the ghetto . While carrying bricks , he drops a load of them , is viciously whipped by an officer and is given a new job supplying the workers with building supplies . He also helps smuggle guns in potato sacks -- the weapons will be given to the resistance fighters on the other side of the wall for the uprising . At one point , he is almost caught by a German officer , who suspects that is hiding something in a sack of beans . After this close call , he decides he must escape and take his chances in the larger city . With the help of friend , ( who was the friend that got his father working papers a few years before ) , he escapes and finds and her husband . They take to his caretaker ( a man with the Polish resistance ) , who hides him for one night . The next day takes him to a vacant apartment near the ghetto wall , where he can live indefinitely on smuggled food ; he must be silent however , since several non - also live in the building and believe the apartment is empty . There , watches part of the Jewish of - 1943 , for which he helped smuggle the weapons , and watches weeks later as the uprising is finally crushed and its participants killed . Later , wants to move as the have found the weapons of the Polish resistance , forcing to be on the run also . says it 's only a matter of time before the find the apartment is hiding in . decides to stay put , feeling safer where he is . His friend gives him an address to go to in case of an emergency , and leaves , gravely warning not to be caught alive by the . Wladyslaw remains in the apartment a few more months until he has an accident , breaking some dishes . The noise has blown his cover , and he has to scurry out of the building , being chased by an angry German woman who suspects him of being Jewish . goes to the emergency address he was given , where he surprisingly meets , who is now married , pregnant , and her brother dead . and her husband hide in another vacant apartment , where there is a piano that his silence keeps him from playing , but his new caretaker , , is very slack about smuggling in food , and once more faces starvation , and at one point almost dies of jaundice . and her husband visit him , finding him gravely ill . They report that had been collecting money from generous and unwitting donors and had pocketed it all , leaving to die in isolation . recovers in time to see the larger 1944 , in which the tried to retake control of their city . Soon the start attacking the building and he has to flee . The had expected the advancing to help them , but the did not come , instead allowing the to put down the revolt , and drive the entire remaining population of out of the city . Wladyslaw hides in the abandoned hospital that had been across the street from his second hideout . The had by then decided to burn to ashes , so flees the hospital and jumps back over the wall into the ghetto , now an abandoned , desolate wasteland of bricks and rubble . He stays there , rummaging through burned - out buildings to find something to eat , and continues to hide , until one night a Nazi officer , , finds him . To prove to that he is a pianist , he plays a somber and brief rendition of 's " in " , the first time he has played since he worked in the Jewish ghetto years before . , moved by 's playing , helps him survive , allowing him to continue hiding in the attic even after the house is established as the 's headquarters . eventually abandons the house with his staff when the Russian army draws closer to . gives a final parcel of food and his overcoat . He asks his surname , which sounds exactly like " spielmann " , the German word for pianist . promises to listen for on the radio . also tells him that he only needs to survive for a few more days ; the Russian army will liberate soon . Shortly afterward , sees Polish partisans , and , overcome with joy , goes outside to meet his countrymen . Seeing his coat given to him by , they think he is a German and try to kill him , before he can convince them he is . In the , newly freed walk past an improvised Russian prisoner of war camp , and is among the prisoners . The hurl insults at the through the fence , but when hears that one of the is a musician , he goes to the fence and tells him that he helped , and asks him to ask to return the favor , before a Russian soldier throws him back down on the ground . The Polish musician does indeed bring back to the site to petition the , but they have departed without a trace by the time he gets there . Wladyslaw is unable to help , but he returns to playing piano for the radio station . Closing title cards tell us that died in a Soviet gulag in 1952 . lived to be an old man , dying in in 2000 at the age of 88 . The cards are intercut with footage of triumphantly playing 's in concert with a full orchestra accompanying him.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > In a hotel room on a afternoon , ( ) and her out - of - town lover ( ) end a stolen lunchtime interlude with yet another disagreement about their future . Marion wants to marry , but debts inherited from his father and his own alimony payments do not leave him enough money to support her as he would like . As they have done so often before on 's business trips to , they part leaving their future uncertain . Marion returns to the real estate office where she works as a secretary , arriving just ahead of her boss ( ) and his client ( ) who buys a house from with $ 40,000 in cash . tells to put the money in the safe deposit box at the bank until . Pleading a headache , asks to take the rest of the day off after her errand to the bank . But does n't go to the bank . On the spur of the moment , she decides to keep the money , packs a suitcase , and starts driving out of town , only to be spotted by her boss at an intersection where he gives her a suspicious look . Worried that she has been found out already , she still proceeds out of town on her way to , , where lives . All the while she keeps looking behind her , fearful that she 's being followed . She drives well into the night and parks alongside the road to sleep . In the morning , a highway patrolman ( ) stops to investigate her stopped car , and awakens her . Startled and nervous , she arouses the patrolman 's suspicions . He looks at her license and registration , taking note of the plate number . He allows her to go on , but follows her for a while , which intensifies 's agitation . Realizing that her car can easily give her away , decides to trade it in for a different car . She stops in at a used car lot , hurriedly pays the salesman ( ) $ 700 cash for a likely substitute , and completes the deal as the same highway patrolman watches from across the street . Nervous , she drives away and continues toward . As night falls on this second day , with her fears of pursuit crowding in around her , she drives into a rainstorm . Unable to see the road clearly , she spots the lighted sign of the , and decides to take a room for the night . As there are no other cars there , and no one in the motel office , she honks her horn upon seeing a light on in the house behind the motel , and a silhouette in the window . Someone dashes down the path to greet her , and he introduces himself as ( ) . He is soft - spoken and shy young man who tells that he lives in the large house with his mother . He comments that the motel seldom has guests anymore since the new interstate bypassed the local highway , and realizes that she probably took a wrong turn in the storm . Still nervous about being tracked by the police , Marion registers under a false name , and checks her into 1 just next to the office . When she asks about food , learns that is only fifteen miles away . offers to share his supper with her so she does n't have to go out again in the rain , and he goes back to the house . She begins unpacking , taking time to wrap the money inside a newspaper which she sets aside on the bed table . Then she overhears a shouted argument between and his mother coming from the house . seems to have a low opinion of young women , and does n't want associating with them . returns to the motel with sandwiches and milk and invites to join him in the parlor just behind the check - in desk . Marion is taken aback by the stuffed birds that fill the parlor , a product of his taxidermy hobby . In their conversation over sandwiches , talks about being trapped . Just as presently feels trapped by her recent hasty decision , is more permanently trapped in his co - existence with his mother and her madness . But as observes , " we all go a little mad sometimes . " Taking 's situation as a cautionary tale , decides to return to to make amends , and try to pull herself out of the trap she 's gotten herself into before it 's too late . When goes back to her room , takes down a picture from the wall and looks through a peephole where he can watch changing . With a new burst of intensity , hurries up the hill and goes into the house . In her room , sits in her robe and calculates some figures , working out how she can repay the $ 700 she has already spent . Then she tears up the paper containing the figures and flushes the pieces down the toilet . With newfound peace of mind , she slips out of her robe and slippers , and steps into the tub to enjoy a cleansing shower . Unseen behind her , the bathroom door opens . A figure approaches and pulls back the shower curtain . It is the shadowy figure of an old woman wielding a large kitchen knife . Marion screams . The blade lifts high into the air , and then strikes , and strikes again and again . Marion can not escape the slicing blows of the knife . The savage attack continues , and then her killer leaves . Marion sinks down , reaching for the shower curtain which rips under her weight , and she falls over the edge of the tub . The shower continues to run over her as her blood flows down the tub drain , her lifeless eyes fixed in a final hopeless stare . From the house , 's voice yells out in shock , " ! Oh , ! ! Blood ! Blood ! " He comes running down the hill and into 's cabin to find the aftermath of 's knife attack . He quickly cleans up the murder scene . He wraps 's body in the shower curtain and places her in the trunk of her car , and gathers her belongings into the trunk as well . At the last moment he spots the newspaper on the bed table and tosses it into the trunk , not knowing that it contains the stolen money . He drives to a swamp near the motel , where he pushes the car in and watches it slowly disappear into the dark bog . One week later , is sitting in the back office of his hardware store in , writing a note to . He has changed his mind , and if it 's not too late he wants to marry her right away even if his finances are limited right now . 's sister , ( ) , comes into the store and asks if is there . tells her she is n't . A private investigator named ( ) also enters the store and asks for 's whereabouts . His interest is in recovering the stolen $ 40,000 , which knew about , but did not . Arbogast is convinced that is somewhere in this town close to her boyfriend , so he sets out on a search of hotels and boarding houses around to track her down . When gets to the , tells him he has n't seen , and that there have n't been any guests in weeks . But Arbogast manages to look at the register and sees the false signature in 's handwriting . Caught in his lie that here had n't been any recent guests , admits to remembering her now , and says she stayed that night and left early on morning . Arbogast spots 's silhouette sitting at the window of the house and asks to see her , but refuses , saying that his mother is an invalid and should n't be disturbed . When lets slip his 's impressions of , becomes determined to talk to her , but insists that he leave . Arbogast phones and to tell them that had registered the previous night at the in 1 , and that he means to sneak back and talk to regardless of 's objections . When he gets back to the motel , looks into the office and the parlor briefly to see if is there , and spots the motel safe which is standing open . Then he heads up to the house and goes inside . Sensing that no one is downstairs , he starts up the stairs . As he nears the top of the landing , emerges from the bedroom and stabs him . He stumbles backwards down the stairs and falls to the floor , where he is set upon and stabbed yet again . At the hardware store , and have been waiting for , who was supposed to return hours ago . tells to stay behind while he goes out to the motel . When he gets there , he calls out but no one answers . , standing by the swamp after having just disposed of the investigator 's remains , hears call out for . Sam returns to the store , having seen no one at the motel or the house . No Arbogast , no , " only a sick old lady unable or unwilling to answer the door . " suggests they go see ( ) to report the missing . At the sheriff 's house , and his wife ( ) listen to and tell their story . At their urging , phones the motel and talks to , who says that the detective had been there but had left . When presses about the mother , tells them that 's mother has been dead and buried for the past ten years , having poisoned her lover and herself in the only murder - suicide in 's living memory . But and insist that there is an old woman out there , and that had told them that would n't let see his mother because she was too ill . That makes the sheriff wonder , if 's mother is up there at the motel , then who is buried in that grave in Cemetery?Back at the motel , is worried about all the people who have been snooping around . After the phone call from , goes up to his house and voices his concerns which leads to another unseen argument with in which he tells her she should hide in the fruit cellar for a few days . She refuses . says he will pick her up and carry her downstairs . She berates him , but in spite of 's protests to be put down , carries his mother down the stairs . The next morning , morning , and meet and coming out of church . The sheriff has already been to the motel before church services . He did n't see anything strange and suggests that the detective probably just moved on to pursue a lead without telling them . He offers to help report a missing person and a theft , and let the law find her sister . Unsatisfied , and decide to go out to the motel for themselves . Their plan is to register as husband and wife and check into a cabin . Then they will search the place more thoroughly . assigns them to 10 , and insists on signing the register . As he pays and asks for a receipt , takes the key and goes ahead toward their cabin . On the way she checks that the door to 1 is unlocked . After a brief stop in cabin 10 to talk matters over , and after they are sure is not nearby , and enter 1 to search for clues . notices that the shower curtain is missing and finds a scrap of paper with something subtracted from $ 40,000 , suggesting that possibly knew about the money . wants to talk to the woman in the house because she might have told something . She wants to distract while she goes to the house . tries to dissuade her , but she insists she can handle a sick old woman . finds in the office and engages him in conversation , while circles around behind the motel to the house . She enters and looks through all the rooms upstairs . She goes into 's bedroom , filled with furnishings and clothes from the Victorian era but strangely preserved as if new . The outline of a woman 's body is deeply impressed into the old mattress . She looks into 's bedroom , another room frozen in time containing the toys and small bed of a child . Meanwhile , has been trying to get to talk about money , looking for some indication that has the stolen cash . begins to grow agitated . When mentions 's mother , realizes that his other guest may be snooping around at the house . tries to keep from leaving , and they struggle . knocks over the head , and falls dazed to the floor . is just coming down the stairs when she sees running toward the front door . She ducks around behind the stairs and partway down the cellar steps to avoid him . heads upstairs . starts to come back up , when she notices the cellar door at the bottom of the steps . This is a room she has n't examined yet , and she risks the opportunity to look into it . Walking through a storage room and into the barren fruit cellar beyond it , she sees an old woman sitting in a chair facing the far wall . She whispers , " . " But the woman does n't respond . She taps the woman on the shoulder . The chair swivels around to reveal the desiccated remains of an old woman 's corpse , her face contorted into a near - skeletal grin and seemingly staring out of eyeless sockets . screams and turns away , and her flinching reaction sets the bare hanging to swinging . At that moment , the living semblance of an old woman enters at the door wielding a large knife , blocking the only escape route from the cellar . In the next moment , 's timely arrival saves , as he subdues the would - be assailant from behind . The " woman 's " falls away to reveal dressed in the guise of his mother . That evening , , , and are among a bewildered group of interested persons who sit in an office in the , waiting to hear from a psychiatrist who has been called in to examine . The psychiatrist ( ) enters to tell them he has gotten the whole story , but not from " . " He got it from 's " Mother . " As a personality , " " no longer exists . The other half , the " " half of 's mind has completely taken over . The psychiatrist goes on to explain that after the death of 's father , came to depend on the undivided attention of his mother . But when she took a lover , felt as if he had been replaced . His jealousy could not stand to share her . So he poisoned both his mother and her lover . Consumed with guilt over his crime , he stole his mother 's corpse and treated it to preserve it as best he could . To further the illusion that his mother was still alive , he began to divide his mind with his mother-- to think and speak for her . He walked around wearing her clothes and a woman 's wig . At times he could be both personalities and carry on both sides of conversations . Other times , the " " half , the dominant half , took over completely . " He was never all ' , ' but he was often only ' . 's " " personality was pathologically jealous of . When met , he felt a strong attraction to her . That attraction set off the jealous " Mother , " and it was " " who killed and most likely , other women before her . In a locked and guarded room , the physical shell of sits unmoving as " Mother " 's voice dominates his mind . She wants to prove to the world how harmless she is by sitting completely still . A fly crawls on 's hand and he does n't swat at it , simply smirks as the voice of 's personality gloats that everyone must see that she would n't even harm a fly . In a final image , a tow chain begins pulling 's car out of the bog . END OF FILM</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > - ( - ) is a young man living in poverty in the slums of a nameless South Korean city with his family - - taek ( - ) , mother - sook ( - jin ) , and sister - ( - dam ) . The family lives in a garden unit where they struggle finding a - signal to sneak into in order to get access to the Internet to watch TV , get fumigated on , and have to watch men urinating in the alley outside their home . They make ends meet by doing menial tasks such as folding pizza boxes - and even then , get criticized by the pizza employees for messing up the boxes . - 's wealthy friend pays the family a visit , giving them a gift - a rock that is supposed to bring those who have it wealth and prosperity . He then tells - that he has been tutoring the teenage daughter of a very wealthy family . He is leaving to study abroad but is in love with the daughter , and knows that any of the other university boys would steal her away . He wants - to be her tutor , knowing he will watch over her so that hyuk can propose to her once she graduates high school . - knows he is n't qualified since he is n't in college , but - promises to vouch for him , and so he agrees and has - forge credentials for him to take to his interview . - woo interviews at the very wealthy family where he meets ( - ) , his scatterbrained wife ( - ) , and their children , teenage daughter - hye and young son - song . - realizes he needs to flirt with Da - hye to get the job , and he does - pays him an exorbitant amount of money and mentions they need an art tutor for Da - song . - song had a traumatic incident where he saw a " ghost " in the house and had a seizure and has been needing help with his art . - introduces them to , who forges documents for herself and goes by " , " and she too begins making money hand over fist . When the 's driver takes her home , - leaves her underwear in the car in order to get him fired : she then suggests her " " as the new driver - who is really - taek . The last position is that of the housekeeper , - ( - ) . She has worked for the home since before the family lived there - she worked for the previous owner , an eccentric architect . In order to get her fired , the exploit her allergy to peaches , causing her to have allergic reactions : they then convince that she is seriously contagiously ill and can not be around their son . She leaves , devastated , and is given the job , fooling the family into hiring the entire family . The family enjoys their massive increase of income , and when the family decides to leave to go camping for - song 's birthday weekend , they take the opportunity to stay in the huge house for the weekend . They spend the evening drinking and eating and making a mess of the place when the doorbell rings : it 's - . She claims she was fired so quickly she left without being able to get something and just wants it back . reluctantly lets her in , and - runs into the basement and begins screaming , opening a secret passage behind some shelves . She goes to her husband , - ( - hoon ) , who has secretly been living in the bunker ever since the previous owner moved out in order to hide from loan sharks . She gives him food while looks on in horror - she tells - she needs to leave , and as - begs her to let them stay , the rest of the family ( who had been eavesdropping ) falls off the stairs and into view - and they call each other " dad , " etc . , which - films on her phone , realizing the con the family has pulled . She threatens to send it to the family and uses that so she and her husband can force the family to do their bidding . The family manages to get the upper hand on them , getting them into the secret bunker , but the family calls : they 've canceled their camping trip due to rain and will be home in eight minutes . The scramble , trying to clean up as much mess as they can , keeping the other two in the basement . They manage to do a good enough job that the rest of the family is able to hide while gives the their dinner - when - breaks out and runs upstairs , shoves her back down the stairs , where she hits her head and is severely wounded . - and - are locked in the bunker . and end up sleeping in the living room in order to keep an eye on - song who is camping out in the backyard , forcing the to stay under the table , frozen all night , even as the complain about 's smell - and then later , have sex . Eventually , in the dead of night , they are able to sneak out . They return home to find their apartment completely flooded with rain and sewage . - takes the rock , and the family sleeps in a shelter for the night . The next day , decides to throw an impromptu party for - song . The family , in their roles as help , are invited and have to pretend that they do n't know that there are two people locked in a bunker under the house . - takes the rock down into the bunker , where - has died and is ambushed by - , who bludgeons him in the head with the rock . He then enters the party , where he stabs - in the chest . The party explodes into horror , and - song has a seizure - - was the " ghost " he had seen in the house prior . screams at his driver , - who is trying to stop - 's bleeding - for the car keys to take his son to the hospital , and he throws them to him . They land under - , who is fighting with . She manages to kill him by stabbing him with a meat skewer . gets the keys but expresses disgusts at - 's smell - this triggers , who snaps and stabs , killing him . faints as flees . - wakes up in the hospital , where he had been in a coma for weeks . He finds out that - has died , and he and are sentenced to probation . There has been no sign of , even though the police have been searching for him for 's murder far and wide . - leaves the rock in a river and observes the former house where he sees the lights flickering - - translates the flickering from code , and learns is controlling them from inside the bunker , where he is now living , sneaking upstairs for food from the new owners . - writes his father a letter back , resolving that someday he will become wealthy enough that he can buy the house and their family can be reunited.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) is a hitman ( or " cleaner " as he would rather be known ) living a solitary life in 's . Most of his work comes from a mafioso named ( ) , who operates from the " " retail store . Lon spends his idle time engaging in calisthenics , nurturing a houseplant that early on he describes as his " best friend " , and ( in one scene ) watching old musicals . Lon is highly motivated and efficient . He kills plenty of bodyguards ( ) so that a fat guy called ( ) receives a phonecall threatening him . A dumb blonde ( - ) walks away non - noncommittally and says she will call him later , not wanting to get involved in the matter . On a particular day on his way home , he sees ( ) , a twelve - year - old girl with a black eye and smoking a cigarette , living with her dysfunctional family in an apartment down the hallway . 's father ( ) attracts the ire of corrupt agents , who have been paying him to store cocaine in his residence , after they discover that he has been stealing some of the drugs for himself . A cadre of agents storm the building , led by a ragged and drug - addicted ( ) . Stansfield shoots 's entire family with a shotgun ; the whore - looking mother ( ) , the aerobic - obsessed elder sister ( ) and the friendly little brother ( missing only because she is out shopping when they arrive . An elderly lady ( ) comes back inquiring what the rackas is about , and shoots the glass behind her , but considers her harmless so he lets her be , just barking at her " go back inside" . When returns with the groceries she was sent to buy and notices the carnage , she calmly continues down the hallway past the open door of her family 's apartment , and receives sanctuary from a reluctant . One of the agents ( ) looks at , quizzingly , as she has to insistently ring the bell on and on before lets her in . Stansfield realises that there 's a little girl missing because of a family photograph he 's found . When the news reaches the door guard , he approaches 's apartment , wondering whether the girl who was accepted there was the missing girl . Lon prepares himself to shoot him , watching through a hidden peephole , but at that moment , turns on the TV with some   Transformers   cartoons , which convinces the guard that he saw another girl who had nothing to do with the situation . offers some consolation to , making her smile when he argues than pigs smell well and are better than many people , and make - pretends that the puppet pig he 's using is talking to her . , who soon discovers that is a hitman , begs him to become her caretaker , and to teach her his skills as a " cleaner " : she wants to avenge the murder of her four - year - old brother , the only member of her family that she actually loved . In return , she offers herself as a maid and teacher , remedying 's illiteracy . says that he could have let her to die outside that door , but as he opened it , now he 's responsible for her well - being . At first , refuses point blank : being a " cleaner " is not a job for girls , and then he alleges that she 's not made for that . To answer to that , shoots some pigeons with one of the guns is cleaning . Lon hesitantly accepts her offer and the two begin working together , slowly building an emotional attachment , with becoming a friend and father figure . They leave 's apartment , and begins to settle some rules . carries 's plant , accepting everything , and convinces the hotel clerk ( ) that she 's preparing for an audition , and that she wo n't practice after 10 . When the hotel clerk asks to fill up the registration form , jumps right in and says " You know how much I love registering . Can I do it , daddy ? " Lon breaths , and apprecciates that is resourceful . The hotel clerk congratulates because he 's got a good daughter , but he 's got a 17 - year - old who ca n't do anything . leaves his plant at reception . He checks everything in the room , the exits , the windows , while fills up the form . As they work together , admits to several times that she is falling in love with him , in spite of him making her drink a glass of milk every day . has been keeping 's money , instead of it being put into a bank . As was illiterate , he did n't want to have to deal with it . Lon asks if he could give it to somebody ; tells him that he 's like a bank , only that there 's no paperwork involved , but that he 's got all the accountancy in his mind , and that is security enough . wants to renew work , as training wo n't earn him any money . Lon prevents from flirting with a guy ( ) , a cute teenage boy a little older than herself - she replies that they were only sharing a cigarette - to which answers that he wants her to quit smoking . adds that she should stay away from him , as he looks like a weirdo . Lon walks to work . tells the hotel clerk that she 's fed up of practicing her instrument and that is not her father , but her lover . walks back to her old flat . She slips past a police guard and picks up a bear and a stack of bills hidden under a loose floor plank . She has to hide , because the is questioning , who is being a jackass about the people he killed in the line of duty . He shouts to the guy that kids should be at school , and also shouts his office number . follows by taxi to the police station . is watching cartoon   Transformers   again when arrives with blood dripping down an arm and a pink dress for her . The hotel clerk arrives with two men , and throws and out . In another hotel , takes a shower and stitches a wound in the chest , where he 's been hurt . wants to pay to kill her brother 's killers , but does n't want to . He tells her that life changes after the first time you kill somebody . She wants to play Russian roulette with him . She threatens him with killing herself - and at the last second he pushes the pistol away . and go talk with . As increases her confidence and experience , she locates , follows him to his office in the building . She attempts to kill him , only to be ambushed by in a bathroom . finds a note she left him declaring her intentions and rushes to the federal building . He rescues her , killing two of 's men in the process . is enraged that the " Italian hitman " has gone rogue and is killing his men . He confronts and threatens him , eventually beating him into surrendering 's whereabouts . Later , as returns home from grocery shopping , an team , sent by , takes her hostage and attempts to infiltrate 's apartment . Lon ambushes the team and takes one of their members hostage , rapidly bartering him for 's freedom . As they slink back into the apartment , creates a quick escape for as he reassures her and tells her that he loves her moments before they come for him . In the chaos that follows , sneaks out of the apartment building disguised as a wounded officer , almost unnoticed except for . follows into the hotel lobby and shoots him from behind . Looming over the dying , jeers him haughtily . However just before he gives out , places an object in 's hands , which he explains is " from " . Opening his hands , recognizes it as grenade pin . He rips open 's vest to discover several grenades on his chest . lets out a brief " Oh , shit " before a massive explosion destroys the hotel lobby . heads to 's place as she was instructed to do by . will not give more than a few dollars of the fortune had amassed , which was being held by . His reasoning is that she is not old enough to receive the large amount of money and that school should be her priority until she 's older . When asks to give her a ' job ' , and insists that she can ' clean ' as had , sternly informs her that he ' ai n't got no work for a 12 - year - old kid ! ' Having nowhere else to go , she is then seen going to using the . The next day , she returns to school in . Seemingly readmitted to the school , walks into a field in front of it with 's houseplant in hand , she digs a hole and plants the houseplant in the grounds of the school , as she had told he should , " to give it roots . "</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The takes place in the of , where a lion rules over the other animals as king . As dawn breaks , all the animals of the are summoned to , the home of the pride of lions . ( ) , a mandrill , walks through the herd and climbs the face of to greet his friend , ( ) . leads to his mate ( ) who is holding their newborn cub . Rafiki anoints the cub with fruit juices before presenting him to the gathered animals . The animals cheer and then bow to the new future king . Meanwhile , ( ) , the younger brother of , is sulking by himself behind . He is envious of his brother 's position as king and is disgruntled at the fact that he will never be king now that has an heir . and his majordomo , a hornbill named ( ) , confront on why he was n't present at the ceremony that morning . Scar shrugs it off , claiming he had forgotten , and scoffs his new responsibility to show respect to the future king before wandering off . As monsoon storms drench the , is seen in his tree home , a large baobab , adding details to his newest piece of art . He chuckles lightly as he finishes , reciting the new cub 's name , ( a budding youth , rises early one morning and pesters his father to get up and show him the lands he 's destined to rule over . illustrates from the top of that everything the light touches is their kingdom , except for a place on the horizon that is covered in shadow . tells he 's forbidden from ever going there . Out in the plains , tells that there is a balance to all life which eventually comes full circle ; the of . When appears with a morning report , takes the opportunity to give a pouncing lesson which goes successfully , much to 's dismay . As gets ready to try again , suddenly exclaims that a group of has been seen in the . rushes off to deal with it while takes Simba home . Simba returns to where his is lurking about . Simba brags about his fate to be king to which reacts without the slightest bit of enthusiasm . Casually , and goading 's excitement , asks if showed him the shadow place on their morning walk . When replies no , adds that it is a dangerous place where only the bravest lions venture . Simba perks up , saying he 's brave , and begs his uncle to tell him what 's there . Scar feigns an accidental slip of the tongue by revealing that it 's an elephant graveyard but praises 's cleverness . He asks that never explore the place , but as Simba reassures him and leaves , smiles to himself knowing full well that 's curiosity will get the better of him . Simba meets up with his friend ( - ) who is being bathed by her mother , . He tells her about a cool place he has found , lying to that its around the water hole . Sarabi gives them permission to go as long as accompanies them . Along the way , and devise a plan together to get rid of , which works . They then run off , showing off her skills as an expert pinner , before finding themselves in the elephant graveyard . Suddenly , Zazu reappears and demands that they leave . Simba shows off his bravery by laughing in front of a large skull . Laughter echoes from within and three hyenas emerge , surrounding the cubs . ( ) , ( ) , and ( ) deliberate what 's to be done with the cubs , more specifically , how to eat them . The cubs and Zazu escape for a moment , but is pulled back and stuffed into a boiler which shoots him into the air . The hyenas eventually corner the cubs in an alcove and tries to roar . The hyenas laugh and tell him to try again . A real roar is let out as appears and attacks the hyenas before they run off . Zazu reappears by 's side and tries to say something but furiously reprimands him for being deliberately disobedient and leads them towards home . Back in the , tells to take home while he teaches a lesson . Fearful and meek , walks up to his father , noticing that his father 's paw print is much bigger than his own . He apologizes for disobeying but says he only wanted to be brave like . tells he 's only brave when he has to be . As they reconcile , tells that all the stars in the night sky are the spirits of kings past and that they will always be there to guide him , as will he . Back in the graveyard , the hyenas lick their wounds and quarrel with each other . Their fights are broken up by who is greeted as a friend . Irritated that the hyenas could n't dispose of the cubs , he proposes a plan that would eliminate both and from the throne . The next day , escorts through a gorge and puts him near a rock shaded by a sapling , telling him that is planning a surprise for him . Scar instructs to stay put while he fetches and suggests that he practice his roar while he 's away . Just above the gorge , the three hyenas lie in wait in front of a massive herd of wildebeest . appears above them , signaling them . As Simba waits , scowling over his little roar , a chameleon climbs down from the tree . Simba practices roaring at it , finally letting off one loud enough to scare the chameleon and echo off all sides of the gorge . But the ground starts shaking and looks up to see the herd of charging down the gorge straight for him . He runs away , the wildebeest gaining , while warns nearby that there is a stampede in the gorge and is down there . Simba manages to grab hold of a broken tree , elevating himself above the wildebeests ' horns while climbs down and runs alongside the animals . He manages to grab in his mouth and carries him to safety , but is pulled back by the charging animals . After a tense moment , watches his father leap onto the side of the gorge , digging his claws into the dirt and struggling up the hillside . As nears the top , he sees standing over him . He pleads for help , but digs his claws into his paws and mocks him before pushing him off . Simba watches helplessly as falls onto the stampeding herd . As the dust settles , runs down to look for his father . He discovers him beneath a broken tree , dead . As he mourns his loss , appears and blames for what happened . Simba , thinking he had started the stampede that killed his father , follows his uncles advice when tells him to run away and never return . Simba runs off as instructs his hyenas to kill him . The three hyenas chase to the edge of an incline where he tumbles into a sea of brambles . Small enough to avoid the sharp spikes , runs through them as the hyenas barely manage to stop near the base . is shoved into the brambles and emerges howling , stuck with thorns . The hyenas watch as Simba runs into the distant desert and decide that he will most likely die , shouting to him that if he ever comes back they will kill him . Scar returns to to announce that both and have perished in the stampede and assumes the role as king . The lionesses look on in fear as a horde of arrives to live alongside at . Rafiki watches sullenly from a distance and smears the image he had once created of . In the desert , has collapsed under the heat and a group of vultures descends on him . Suddenly , a meerkat and a warthog charge into them , bucking and kicking them away as part of their favorite game ; bowling for buzzards . The warthog , ( ) , then discovers and brings him to the attention of his companion , ( ) . is initially afraid of the young lion but asserts that he 's still little and will grow up to be on their side instead of eating them . scoffs at the idea , before suggesting the very same thing as his own . picks up and carries him into the shade where he 's revived . Simba thanks them for their help before walking away . and take pity on him and tell him that , whatever happened to him , he has to put his past behind him , citing their motto ; no worries . They then invite to stay with them as a fellow outcast in their jungle paradise and teach him to eat bugs rather than meat . Simba begins to cheer up and eventually grows into a healthy , carefree adult ( , the have been reduced to a wasteland under rule . is confined to a bone cage singing while lazily lies about chewing on bones . Zazu mutters under his breath that he never had to do this under . Scar reels on the name , citing that the law is to never mention name . , , and appear , complaining that food and water have become scarce and that the lionesses refuse to hunt . suggests they eat as lets slip name before he corrects himself under glare . Scar then dismisses them . Back in the jungle , , , and lie down together after a meal of bugs to look up at the night sky . asks what the sparkling lights in the sky are to which replies that they 're fireflies that got stuck in the big , bluish - black thing . says he 'd always thought they were burning balls of gas billions of miles away , a theory which debunks due to 's flatulent nature . They ask what he thinks . Answering only to their begging , he says he was once told that the lights are great kings of the past watching over them . starts cracking up over the thought of royal dead guys watching them , but Simba wanders off , saddened over the memory of his father . He sighs and collapses onto a bunch of wild flowers , spreading their petals and leaves to the wind . The wind carries them back to the where , sitting atop his tree , grabs them . He takes them back into the tree where he sniffs them and contemplates the apparent familiar smell . Suddenly it strikes him ; must be alive . Crazed with happiness , he quickly smears a mane around the head of his drawing , stating that it is time . and are walking through the jungle together when becomes distracted by a large rhino beetle . Hungry , he follows it to the edge of the jungle and sneaks up on it as its perched on a log facing some grassland . His eye then catches something in the tall grass as the beetle flies away . screams as a lioness emerges from the grasses and gives chase . Hearing , comes running and finds him stuck in the roots of a tree . He tries to free as the lioness draws closer . She leaps forward but jumps in and begins to fight with her while cheers him on . He tries to knock her down but she flips him over and pins him to the ground . Simba recognizes this move and his old friend , ( ) . When he reveals himself , is shocked and happy to see him again . Simba introduces her to and , who is less than happy about the reunion since had tried to eat . tells that everyone in the thought he was dead after told them about the stampede . Nervous , asks what else told them , but says that it does n't matter now that he 's alive and the rightful king . Simba excuses and to speak to alone . As they walk through the jungle together the romantic settings encourage their feelings for each other , though is hesitant to talk to about his past . She tries to get to go back to the with her , telling him that everything has fallen into disarray since took the throne . He refuses , explaining that he should n't worry about things that happened in the past , which angers . She tells that returning to the throne is his responsibility but he storms off and walks out of the jungle to an open field . He tries to justify his decision before yelling at the night sky that was n't there for him and feeling solemn that it was his fault . He then hears singing coming from a tree behind him and sees in the branches . Irritated , he walks away . follows him and asks him a series of rhetorical questions and chanting seemingly nonsensical words . Convinced that the baboon is crazy and confused , turns to walk away when reveals that he knows is son . Rafiki then runs off and follows . He finds mediating on a rock and asks if he knew his father . says " I know your father " , to which responds that he died . Rafiki laughs , saying that is alive , and leads through a thicket of trees and vines . They stop at a reflecting pool and Rafiki instructs to look into it . Seeing only his reflection at first , looks harder and sees an image of . says that lives within him as a large storm cloud appears overhead and a specter of speaks out to , saying that he has forgotten who he is and that he must take his rightful place as the true king of . Simba begs his father to stay but the apparition disappears , echoing that must remember who he is . As contemplates the message and the change in the winds , wallops him over the head with his staff . Outraged and in pain , asks what he did that for . says that it does n't matter because its in the past , but though the past may still hurt , one can either run from it or learn from it . He swings his staff again and Simba ducks before grabbing the staff and throwing it away . Then watches and cheers as Simba runs off , announcing that he 's going back . and are sleeping together as approaches them and nudges them awake , frightening them at first . She asks if they 've seen but appears overhead and declares that the king has returned . Confused by this statement and mysterious arrival and departure , and listen as tries to explain that has decided to go back to the to take his place as king . Crossing the desert , finally arrives in the to find it dark and barren . He eyes with a look of vengeance when , , and appear beside him . They all agree to help reclaim the throne , though is less than impressed by the landscape they 're fighting for . They sneak over to and discover that its crawling with hyenas . Simba offers and as live bait and they do put on a colorful performance for the hungry hyenas while he and move closer . Simba instructs to rally the lionesses while he looks for . He finds him at the base of , calling loudly for . Hyenas nip at her heels as she approaches and Simba looks on mournfully . Scar questions her as to why the lionesses refuse to hunt . Sarabi explains that the herds have moved on and their only chance for survival is to leave . refuses and , when compares him to , he cruelly hits her . Having seen enough , appears on a ledge and runs down to comfort his mother . Scar backs away , fearful that its that has returned , but when he realizes who it really is , he shoots a hateful glare at , , and . Simba confronts , demanding that he step down from the throne or fight , but sly asks why things must end in violence and says he would feel terrible if he were responsible for the death of a family member . Though says he 's put the past behind him , questions whether the lionesses have done the same . When questions this , prompts Simba to tell them all who was responsible for death . Sadly , confesses that he was , though it was an accident . uses this and accuses of being a murderer , backing him up to the end of to the point where slips over the edge , dangling by his paws . Lightning strikes and ignites a fire beneath him as looks over him , remarking that this was just the way looked before he died . Then grabs paws and whispers in his ear that he was the one to kill . , Simba leaps over the edge and pins , choking him to confess the truth to the lionesses . Fighting immediately breaks out between the hyenas and the lions . and join the fray with their signature bowling moves and impresses with some acrobatic martial arts . When is cornered by and in the lions den with , comes to the rescue , his fury provoked when accidentally calls him a pig . Scar manages to slip away from the fighting but is followed by . They meet at the top of surrounded by flames where begs for his life , saying that he 's family and that the hyenas are the real enemy . Having heard this , the hyenas back away growling . Simba relents , saying that he 's not like and tells him to run away and never return . Scar meekly walks past him but sends a pile of embers into face , blinding him for a moment . Scar then attacks and a fierce fight ensues . Scar manages to knock down and leaps at him but , using the technique had mastered in her pinning , flips with his hind legs over the edge of . Scar tumbles down the rock face and lands at the base . He groggily stands up and notices the hyenas approaching him from between the flames . He greets them as his friends but they respond that he said they were the enemy . looks at them in horror as they lick their lips and surround him before attacking . Rain begins to fall and Simba returns to the lionesses where he greets his mother and . Rafiki rattles his staff and points it towards the tip of . He bows to , who gives him a hug , and says it is time . As everyone watches , and as the rain washes away dust and bones , ascends , gazing one last time at the heavens before letting out a mighty roar and sealing his position as king . The lionesses join in , hailing their new king . Some time later , the animals of the gather once again at , cheering at and as they overlook the kingdom . Rafiki comes between them and holds up their newborn cub for all to see.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > Shouting " victor ! " as his forces attack , ( ) leads his Roman legions to victory against barbarians in the year 180 , ending a prolonged war and earning the esteem of elderly ( ) . The emperor 's son ( ) and daughter ( ) have been summoned to join the campaign because is about to name his successor . , confident he 'll be chosen , is friendly to , calling him " brother . " and apparently had a romantic involvement at some time in the past ; is concerned that it will trouble her to see him again . ( has since married , had a son , and been widowed . ) tells he asked her to come because her brother , who 's very fond of her , will soon need her more than ever . appoints the morally - upstanding as his successor , with the understanding that will eventually restore the by returning power to the . , longing to go home to his wife and son , tries to decline the honor , but insists that not wanting the job makes the best man for it . At the end of a wrenching interview in which accuses his father of not recognizing his virtues and never loving him , confesses that all he ever wanted was his father 's love and approval -- and then he smothers him . Declaring himself emperor , asks for his loyalty , which , realizing ' involvement in 's death , refuses . orders arrested and executed and dispatches Praetorian guards to murder 's wife ( ) and young son ( ) . narrowly escapes his execution and races home only to discover his family 's charred and crucified bodies in the smoldering ruins of his villa . After burying his wife and son , a grieving succumbs to exhaustion and collapses on their graves . Slave traders find and take him to , a rugged province in , where he is purchased by ( ) , the head of a gladiator school . Distraught and nihilistic over the death of his family and betrayal by his empire , initially refuses to fight , but as he defends himself in the arena his formidable combat skills lead to a rise in popularity with the audience . As he trains and fights further , befriends ( ) , a Germanic barbarian , and ( ) , a Numidian hunter . becomes a close friend and confidant of the grieving , and the two speak frequently of the afterlife and ' eventual reunification with his family . In , reopens the gladiatorial games to commemorate his father 's death , declaring 150 days of celebration in a bid to win the affections of the Roman populace . 's company of gladiators is hired to participate . tells that his abilities as a fighter wo n't be enough in ; he needs to win the affections of the audience . at first does n't like the idea of playing to the crowd , but explains that it might save his life , revealing that he himself used to be a gladiator , and after gaining popularity was freed by the -- he shows the wooden sword he received at the time . is incredulous at first ( " You knew ? " ) , but then realizes this strategy might get him close enough to to get his revenge . In a recreation of the of ( incorrectly named the of Carthage ) at the , leads 's gladiators to decisive victory against a more powerful force , much to the amazement of the crowd . descends into the arena to meet the victors and is stunned to discover that the leader of 's gladiators is . The emperor , unable to kill because of the crowd 's roaring approval for him , gives the thumbs - up sign allowing to live and sulks out of the arena . As the games continue , pits against of ( - ) , 's only undefeated gladiator , in an arena surrounded by chained tigers with handlers instructed to target . Following an intense battle , narrowly defeats and awaits 's decision to kill or spare . Though votes for death ( thumb down ) , spares , deliberately insulting the emperor and garnering the audience 's approval . With his bitter enemy now known as " the Merciful , " becomes more frustrated at his inability to kill or stop his ascending popularity while 's own popularity shrinks . Following the fight , meets his former servant ( ) , who reveals that 's army remains loyal to him . They are camped at the port of . , increasingly fearful of her brother 's instability and incestuous desires , forms a plot with and ( ) to reunite with his army and overthrow . , however , learns of his sister 's betrayal from her young son ( ) and forces her to reveal the plot by threatening the boy . Praetorian guards immediately storm 's gladiator barracks , battling the gladiators while escapes . Hagen and are killed in the siege while and the survivors are imprisoned . escapes to the city walls only to be ambushed by a cohort of Praetorian guards who use as bait , killing him as soon as comes out in the open . Concluding that legends born in the must die there , personally challenges to a duel in front of a roaring audience . Acknowledging that 's skill exceeds his own , deliberately stabs with a stiletto , puncturing his lung , and has the wound concealed beneath the gladiator 's armor . In the arena , the two exchange blows before rips the sword from ' hands . requests a sword from his guards , but they refuse to lend him their weapons . drops his own sword , but pulls a hidden stiletto and renews his attack . then beats into submission and kills him with his own stiletto . As collapses in the now - silent , a dying sees his wife and son in the afterlife . He reaches for them , but is pulled back to reality by the Praetorian prefect ( ) , who asks for instructions . orders the release of 's gladiators and , whom he reinstates and instructs to lead the restoration of power to the : as intended , will be a republic again . collapses and rushes to his side . After being reassured that her son is safe and is dead , dies and wanders into the afterlife to his home and family in the distance . and 's gladiators carry his body out of the . That night , a newly - freed buries ' two small statues of his wife and son in the ( in the patch of ' blood ) , and says that he too will eventually join them , " but not yet . "</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > In the opening scene , we see waves crashing over a beach which eventually changes to a car driving by various stores . We next see a young teen boy ( ) trying to sleep but ca n't due to his older brother ( ) and his girlfriend ( ) having loud sex in the next bedroom . A car drives by with three black men inside . The car stops outside and 's house . It then shows is caressing 's naked body , is then slowing turning in his sleep . The three black men slowly get out of their car . One goes over to 's truck and the other by his house . The one black man then smashes 's truck window awaking . and are then seen in yet another sexual position , her moaning becoming faster . slowly gets up and peers out from his bedroom window . He sees the man that broke 's truck window inside looking around . This startles so he runs into his brother 's room to find riding in the cowgirl position . tells what he witnessed but this startles and . asks how long the man has been there and if he is strapped , says that he does n't know . takes a pistol out of a nightstand drawer . He then goes down to the middle of the stairs with following him . tells to stay put . then goes to the door and peers out of the peephole . He then kicks the door in and shoots the one black man twice . The man falls down . The other black man makes a run for it but fires three shots from his gun hitting the man with two of them . The other is uninjured and takes off in 's truck . Derek fires multiple shots at the truck breaking the back window . looks down and sees the black man injured from the gunshot wounds . then stars to angrily walk toward him , his arm raised as if to gun whip him . In present time , we see is now sitting in the principal 's office , waiting to be summoned . As we move into the office , we hear and see 's history teacher , ( ) , explaining to the principal , ( ) , that wrote a book report on , 's autobiography that details his anti - Semitic beliefs . tells that he is offended by 's gesture and he wants to see him punished . Instead , asks to leave and asks to step in . With an American flag toothpick hanging from his mouth , steps into the office and sits down . begins yelling at , telling him that writing what he did is offensive and he only did it because his brother influenced him in that way . argues of course but in the end wins and tells him that he is now his new history teacher . The class is called " " and the next assignment is due tomorrow morning ; a paper on his brother , ( ) , who is currently incarcerated . The next scene opens in the school bathroom with three black boys beating up a white boy for telling the teacher that one of them cheated . Suddenly , appears out of one of the stalls and demands that they stop . One boy , , argues with him but simply blows the smoke from his cigarette into his face . The boys leave , helps the white kid from the ground and tells him that he needs to learn to stand up for himself and they leave . Soon we see walking home from school through a park where some black men are playing basketball ; one is . We hear begin to narrate the scene and we learn that before went to jail the white kids in the neighborhood did n't have to be afraid of the black kids because made the area safe . The next scenes are flashbacks explaining 's journey from a suburban white kid to a vengeance - seeking white supremacist . When and were younger , a black drug dealer shot their father , an firefighter , while he was doing his job . Soon after that , a middle - aged white supremacist , ( ) , sought out , hoping to begin a new movement throughout the suburban white youth culture . convinced that what happened to his father was an act of racism by the black man and it was n't right and he , or any other white kid , should n't be scared . , a natural leader and brilliant orator , began rounding up scared suburban white kids for his new gang and telling them that there was nothing to be afraid of anymore . This new craze became so popular among the kids of that soon became an icon . His legacy started then and continued even throughout the time he spent in jail . The night was arrested , three young Black men were trying to break into his car . hears them and informs his brother . rushed downstairs , gun in hand , and opened the door and began shooting the men . Killing two of the three , then demanded the last man to put his upper teeth on the curb and not move . He then ruthlessly kills him by stomping on the back of his head . Almost immediately after , the police arrive and take away , who submits to them without a fight . As he 's handcuffed , sees that has a very telling smile on his face . Later , while attempts to type 's assignment , he reflects on the fact that if he 'd been called into court to testify against his brother , his brother would have been convicted of first degree murder and drawn a much harsher sentence . In jail , tries to find a group of people to hang out with as protection from the Hispanic and black prisoners . Not too long after arriving , he finds a group of white supremacists that accept him . As time went by , noticed and starts to realize the compromises men made to stay ahead in the jail - because the supremacists were a minority , they paid a non - white gang to keep them safe . When he learned that a fellow white supremacist was doing favors for a Mexican man , he became enraged and stopped interacting with the group . Later , was assigned laundry duty with a black inmate named . was friendly toward , but was not friendly back , at first . Soon and began to befriend each other and became good acquaintances . Angered that had befriended a black inmate and seemed to be abandoning them , the gang attacks him in the shower , one of them raping him . The day this happened , , who was also 's teacher , came to visit him . As soon as he arrived , broke down in tears and told that he wanted out and that he wanted to take everything back and move as far away as possible so he would n't hurt his family anymore . told that it was n't enough ; was headed down the same path and he must do whatever was necessary for to not end up like him . agreed and told him that he was ready to do anything for his brother once he was out . After about three years , is released from prison and returns home to find that has become a white supremacist as well . He also learns that what was once a small following has turned into a considerably large one due to 's influence and 's legend . That night , and both go to a party that is throwing for 's homecoming . Once there , he finds his old girlfriend , ( ) , and asks her to move far away with him . He tells her that he does n't want any of this anymore , he 's done with white supremacy . Following that , she asks him if he 's crazy and runs off in anger . looks for and finally finds him in 's office . tells to leave and that there is a girl outside waiting for him . After leaves , confronts and tells him that he 's done with the whole white supremacist thing and he knows 's game - had once rolled over on a couple of his own men and let them go to jail . is infuriated and they start to argue . The argument ends when punches in the face and then kicks him again while he 's down . Derek leaves and calls for to come with him . On his way out , ( ) , a friend of 's before he went to jail , starts yelling at him and demanding an answer as to what happened to . is befuddled and keeps yelling for but then pulls out a gun and points it at . begins to yell from the side , " Shoot him ! Shoot him ! " and continues to get closer and closer . Just as is about to do it , grabs the gun and points it up then pushes him and tells him to step away . calls and starts to run away , gun in hand . soon catches up to him and begins to explain his life in prison & his change in attitude . Even though is frustrated with , because he 's giving up the only thing he thinks brings the white kids hope against the non - white race , he understands and forgives him and they walk home . When they arrive , begins working on his paper and enters the room . They both look at each other and move toward the wall that is covered in white supremacist propaganda ; they take everything down . When they 're done , returns to the computer to write his paper and gets into the shower . The following morning , at sunrise , is narrator , telling us the end to his story . He says that he 's never watched the sunrise before and he hopes that this paper is what he , , is looking for . gets ready for his meeting with his probation officer and soon they leave together . walks to school before his meeting , and on their way they stop at a . There , they meet up with and . They tell that and were found last night after being jumped and they are now in the hospital . and both ask if he knows anything about it and he swears he does n't . tells them that he has somewhere to go and that he 's going to walk to school before he goes . They set off on their way . As is dropping him off , he staggers over words and finally says " I 'll see you at home . " departs for the front doors and heads down the street . While he 's walking , the audience can sense the fear in . At the same time , enters the bathroom just before class starts . What does n't know is that is in the bathroom as well . He raises a gun and shoots a number of times as blood spatters against the bathroom stall , he falls to the ground lifeless . Next we see is in the bathroom with . He sits with him and holds his body close to his , extremely distraught . The only things we can hear between sobs are the remarks is making to himself about what he 's done . Immediately after , 's voice takes over as narrator and we hear the closing statement of the paper he 's written about his brother:"So I guess this is where I tell you what I learned - my conclusion , right ? Well , my conclusion is : Hate is baggage . Life 's too short to be pissed off all the time . It 's just not worth it . says it 's always good to end a paper with a quote . He says someone else has already said it best . So if you ca n't top it , steal from them and go out strong . So I picked a guy I thought you 'd like . ' We are not enemies , but friends . We must not be enemies . Though passion may have strained , it must not break our bonds of affection . The mystic chords of memory will swell when again touched , as surely they will be , by the better angels of our nature . ' " We see an image of as waves crash over the sunset , then the credits start to roll.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > In voiceover , Irish - American mobster ( ) explains that he does n't want to be the product of his environment , he wants his environment to be a product of him . Grainy historical film depicts violent riots in during earlier generations . , proudly Irish , unapologetically racist , explains that what annoys him about is their refusal to realize that they wo n't be given anything . 's belief is you have to do whatever possible to take what you want . is in a small convenience store and collects protection money from the shop owner , a man visibly unnerved by . warns him to have more money next time . asks the shop owner 's young teenage daughter behind the counter if she 's got her period yet . His attitude is nonchalant and all the more threatening for it . The daughter is both affronted and compelled by the powerful and answers his rhetorical question . The shop owner does n't show any emotion . A small boy , a young ( ) , witnesses 's interaction with the shop owner . Costello notices him and asks him if he 's the son of a man knows . He tells the store owner to give the boy two full bags of groceries and then presses some coins into the boy 's hand . He tells the boy to remember he can get more money from when he gets older . As comes up in age , grooms him and steers him into a job as a police officer , where he can keep informed . graduates from the police academy and is immediately transferred to the force . He is accepted into the led by ( ) which focuses on organized crime . The primary target of the unit is . ( ) is warmly welcomed onto the force by ( ) and ( Wahlberg).Billy ( ) , whose extended family has considerable ties to organized crime , also attends the police academy . Before he graduates , he is summoned to a meeting with and who intimidate , bully , and verbally harass him . They pressure him to disqualify himself as an officer because he 's too smart to be a cop and because of his family 's ties to crime . When stands up to their hazing , they change tactics : they offer him a job as a police officer on one condition : that he quit the academy , serve serious time in jail on a trumped - up assault charge , and infiltrate 's organization . Only and will know that is working undercover . They promise him a bonus when he completes the assignment . When gets out of prison , he contacts his cousin and tries to finance a drug deal . and his cousin meet ( ) at a local bar , where orders a cranberry juice . The guy on the bar stool next to him asks if he is having his period . smashes a beer over the man 's head and is halted . warns that he is not allowed to beat up certain men , and he 's lucky the guy at the bar is not one of them . Eating at the counter of a store like that in which originally met , confronts two Italian mobsters from extorting protection money from the store owner . He beats the two men up badly , breaking his hand when he hits one of them . Costello learns of 's actions and summons him to a meeting . He offers to protect from the , who , he promises , will return with reinforcements to kill . He invites into a back room where he instructs , a senior member of 's crew , to check for weapons or a wire . breaks 's cast open and beats 's broken hand with a shoe , trying to get him to confess being a cop . withstands their beating and is accepted as a legitimate crook by . Both and gain credibility within their respective organizations . visits a crime scene where the two men from are found . contacts , who directs him to influence the investigators away from . begins dating psychiatrist ( ) . also sees her but as a client , required under the terms of his probation . He also develops an attraction to her . During a deal to sell stolen missile guidance microchips to Chinese government agents , warns of the police operation and everyone avoids police detection by boarding boats waiting at the back of the warehouse . It becomes evident to both and that there is a mole in each other 's organization , though their identities can not be determined . talks to and threatens to leave but tells him to come up with evidence so they can find the mole . Extremely agitated , relents . He has coffee with who plans to move in with . tells to find the " rat " among his crew . asks for his crew members ' social security numbers and other forms of so he can track them down . searches for the informant and learns from a member of 's crew that himself is an informant , explaining why federal prosecutors repeatedly fail to indict and arrest . visits at home late at night and tells him that is an informant . collects everyone 's social security numbers and other . corrects 's ( ) misspelling of ' citizens ' on the envelope containing their information and then leaves . He visits at her apartment , where she is finishing moving out . She tells him she is moving in with . They talk and then have sex . puts in charge of the investigation to find the mole in the , citing his " immaculate record . " follows to a porn theater , where he sees meet with and give a dark figure -- unknown to him , -- the envelope containing 's crew members ' personal information . chases out the emergency exit of the theater and through but neither man learns the other 's identity . tells to trail to a meeting with . gets away before 's men throw off the roof , landing at 's feet . As 's crew leaves , joins them , pretending he 's just arrived to join them in the assassination . ( ) is mortally wounded . Back at their bar , Delahunt fingers as the mole but dies before he can tell anyone else . A news report reveals that , a crew member , was an undercover cop . Consequently , is forced to step down from the police force . Using 's phone , reaches , and fails to persuade him to quit his work as a mole . learns from 's diary that was an informant for the of . He worries that his identity as a mole for may be revealed . With 's help , is traced by the police to a cocaine pick - up , where a gunfight erupts between his crew and police , during which most of 's crew are killed . confronts the wounded , who admits he is an occasional informant . shoots him multiple times . is applauded the next day for having killed by everyone on the force . In good faith , comes to see him , seeking to get his civilian identity restored and to collect his back pay . He tells he intends to resume his civilian life . leaves to look up 's employee record when notices the envelope from on 's desk . finally realizes is 's mole . Returning to his desk , realizes that has figured out his true identity , so he erases 's employee records from the police computer system . tells she 's pregnant , but does n't reveal who the father is . A few days later she receives a package in the mail from addressed to . She opens it to find it contains a CD of 's recorded conversations with . walks in as she is listening and tries unsuccessfully to assuage her suspicions . He contacts , who reveals that recorded every conversation he had with . left the recordings with his attorney , who has given them to . says he wants his civilian identity back or he will implicate . They agree to meet on the roof of the same building where was killed . When they meet , catches off - guard and handcuffs him . As had secretly arranged , ( ) appears on the roof as well . Shocked to see in handcuffs and held at gunpoint by , draws his gun on . explains his actions by revealing that is the mole . asks why did not accompany him , but does n't answer . leads to the elevator and takes the stairs to follow them . When the elevator reaches the ground floor and the doors open , ( ) shoots in the head . When arrives , kills him too . reveals to that had more than one mole in the police and that was going to give both of them up to the . When momentarily turns , shoots him in the head . At police headquarters , concocts a story to protect himself , identifying as the mole and recommends for the of . At 's funeral , and stand by the grave . attempts to talk to her , but she ignores him . As enters his apartment , he is met by , who shoots and kills him . As the frame drifts up to the window and the gold dome of the in the background , a rat scurries along the railing.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > On the deck of a ship in , , a figure identified as speaks with an injured man called . The two talk briefly , then appears to shoot before setting the ship ablaze . The next day , ( ) and special agent ( ) arrive in separately to investigate what happened on the boat . 27 people have been killed in the fire . There appear to be only two survivors : a crippled man named ' ' ( ) and a hospitalized Hungarian criminal and crewman . interrogates the , who claims that , a Turkish criminal mastermind with a nearly mythical reputation , was in the harbor " killing many men . " The begins to describe Sze while a translator interprets and a police sketch artist draws a rendering of 's face . Meanwhile , tells the authorities everything he knows in exchange for immunity . After making his statement to the district attorney , is placed in a police station office of . ( ) , where both he and requests to hear the story again , from the beginning .... 's tale starts six weeks earlier in , when an armored truck containing spare gun parts is hijacked in . The driver of the stolen truck was grabbed from behind and never saw the person or persons who accosted him , but the unknown hijacker spoke to him . Subsequently , the round up five different criminals : ( ) is a corrupt former police officer who has apparently given up his life of crime , and is arrested while eating dinner at a fancy restaurant ; ( ) is a crack shot with a temper and a wild streak , arrested in the middle of the night in his bed ; ( ) is 's Hispanic partner who speaks in mangled , and is nabbed on a street corner ; ( ) is a car mechanic and part - time hijacker who forms an instant rivalry with , and is picked up while working on a car in his garage ; and himself , who is a con artist that suffers from cerebral . The five men are brought together for a lineup , and are told to say the phrase , " Give me the keys , you fucking cocksucker . " They all manage to butcher the phrase . Later , while sitting in a holding cell , convinces the others to join forces to commit a robbery targeting 's service , a group of corrupt police officers who escort smugglers to their destinations around the city . Their attack on one smuggler ( ) goes off without a hitch , with farther reaching consequences as numerous other officers are indicted on corruption charges . With their loot , the quintet travels to to sell it to 's fence , ( ) . talks them into another job : robbing a purported jewel smuggler named . Instead of jewels or money , as they were told he was carrying , the smuggler had heroin . An angry confrontation between the thieves and reveals that the job came from a lawyer named ( ) . The five criminals later meet with , who claims to work for and blackmails them into destroying the cargo of a ship coming to harbor . In the present , tells the story of as he apparently heard it . 's flashback reveals 's family being harassed by a rival Hungarian gang in . Sze goes on a murderous vendetta against all those who were involved . Afterwards , he apparently disappears ; thereafter , he rarely conducts business without an alias and maintains anonymity between himself and anyone working for him . With time , 's story takes on mythic stature , with most people either doubting his existence or disbelieving it entirely . Back in the present , continues to tell his version of what happened then . His flashback resumes to reveal 's attempt to run away , but he is tracked and killed ( off - camera ) by . The remaining four thieves kidnap , believing Sze to be a cover for his activities and intending to kill him if he does not leave them alone . Before can execute him , reveals that lawyer ( ) , 's girlfriend , is in his office . also says that he has the will , the information , and the means to injure or kill the remaining four criminals ' relatives if they do not go through with the arrangement . On the night of the cocaine deal , the sellers -- a group of mobsters -- are on the dock , as are the buyers -- a group of Hungarian mobsters . tells to stay back , and to take the money to Edie if the plan goes awry so she can pursue " her way ; " reluctantly agrees to do so . He watches the boat from a distance , in hiding , as , and attack the men at the pier in a huge gunfight . During the battle , is killed as and discover separately that there is no cocaine on the boat . Meanwhile , the , yet untouched by the thieves , are being picked off by an unseen killer , and a closely - guarded Hispanic passenger is killed by an unseen assailant . is killed with a knife to the back of his neck , and , turning away to leave , is shot in the back . A figure in a dark coat appears , presumably Sze , and lights a cigarette with a gold lighter . He appears to speak briefly with before apparently shooting him ( the scene which began the film in medias res).In the present , with 's story finished , reveals what he has deduced , with the aide of : The boat hijacking was not about cocaine , but rather to ensure that one man aboard the ship -- the Hispanic passenger held captive , named ( ) , one of the few individuals alive who could positively identify Sze -- is killed . After Sze presumably killed the man , he eliminated everyone else on the ship and set it ablaze ; reveals that has also been killed . has concluded that was . admits that the whole affair , from the beginning , was 's idea . His bail having been posted , departs with his immunity . retrieves his personal effects from the property officer as , relaxing in 's office that he used for the interrogation , notices that details and names from 's story are words appearing on various objects around the room . ' ' is the name on a wanted poster , for example , and ' ' is written on the bottom of a coffee cup that handled earlier . Quickly putting the pieces together , realizes that made up practically the entire story as he talked . He runs outside just as a fax arrives with the police artist 's impression of 's face .... which resembles . As he leaves the police station , 's distinctive limp gradually disappears and he shakes out his palsied hand . He steps into a waiting car driven by " , " departing just as comes outside to see too late that is gone . is Sze , so how much of his narration was truthful is open to interpretation.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The begins with shots of several dozen top hats inexplicably strewn about in a forest . Cutter ( ) , in voiceover , explains the three parts of a magic trick while performing a disappearing bird trick for a little girl . Part one is the pledge , where the magician shows you something ordinary , like a bird . Part two is the turn , where he does something extraordinary , like make the bird disappear . But this is n't enough . There always has to be a third act , the prestige , where you have a twist , and bring the bird back . Only then will the audience applaud . ( ) , stage name " the , " attempts a transporting trick that involves walking under a giant electrical machine with a coil and then disappearing through a trapdoor . Except that he falls straight into a giant tank of water that has been placed under the stage , and is automatically locked inside . A man in the audience , who we shortly learn is fellow ( ) , stage name " the , " forces his way beneath the stage in time to see drown . After this introduction , we follow three timelines at once . In the present day ( 19th century ) , is on trial for murdering , who we learn was his greatest rival . Cutter is revealed to be 's engineer , the man who builds the machinery for his tricks , and the little girl is 's daughter ( Samantha Mahurin).Cutter confides to the judge in a private meeting that the machine was using was n't built by him , but by " a wizard , " and it legitimately did what it appeared to do . The trial does not go well for , and he faces execution . Later , in jail , is approached by the solicitor for a collector , , who is interested in buying his secrets , particularly the secret of 's famous " " trick . The same collector has also bought all of 's equipment and props . When refuses , the solicitor threatens that is in danger of being declared an indigent orphan and sent to the workhouse unless his patron intervenes . As an incentive , he gives 's diary , which documents the time he spent in trying to learn 's secret . 's reading of the diary in prison frames the second part of the narrative , which is from 's point of view . is on a train in the , headed to , , on his way to see the notorious scientist ( ) . at the train station in town , is taken by coach to the , where he gets an unusually warm welcome from the hotel staff . The manager tells that he 's their first guest of the winter . asks if a ride can be arranged to take him up to 's the next day , but is told that the peak is closed for experimentation . The next day , is dropped off on a dirt track in the woods , at the farthest point the carriage can take him . He makes his way up to the fence surrounding a clearing . He is immediately thrown back as the fence is electrified . 's assistant ( ) comes out of the gatehouse , thinking at first that is another intruder , then recognizes him , saying he 's seen 's show . says he 's come to ask to build him a machine like one that he believes built for -- the machine that allows to do the " " trick . says he ca n't help , and heads back to the hotel , disappointed . takes satisfaction when , back turned to him , correctly guesses that is holding a gold watch in his hand . sits down in his room and begins decoding a diary he stole from , which is encrypted with a particular five - letter - word passcode ( 's diary frames the third thread of the narrative , which goes back to the very beginning . and are partners , up - and - comers working for an elderly magician named ( ) . also employs and 's wife ( ) . Their best trick is an underwater escape act . In this act , and are planted in the audience and called up to the stage to tie 's wrists and ankles before she is hoisted up on a pulley and dropped into a water tank . A curtain descends on the tank , and slips the knot around her wrists and escapes using a trick lock on the tank . As a safety precaution , Cutter is positioned stage right , behind the curtains , with a stopwatch and an axe . and are on friendly terms , though is somewhat concerned that might be using a knot that is more difficult for to slip . We learn that is using an alias so he wo n't embarrass his prominent family with his theatrical pursuits , while and his engineer come from a rougher background . is much more ambitious than , is n't afraid to do dirtier tricks , and wishes would try more dangerous tricks , like a bullet catch . claims to have created a trick that will be his masterpiece . One day , sends and to watch a Chinese magician , ( ) , and figure out exactly how the man makes a heavy goldfish bowl ( filled with water and goldfish ) appear from under a cloth . immediately deduces that the old magician is really putting up a front : he 's holding the bowl between his legs under his skirt , hiding the strength required to accomplish the trick by always appearing frail in public . admires the way the Chinese magician goes to such an extreme that he " lives " his performance at home . is surprised , since when he tries holding an empty goldfish bowl at home , he has a hard time carrying it . As his prize for working out the fishbowl trick , gets a few minutes onstage assisting during a performance , where he performs a trick where a bird and cage disappear simultaneously , and then the bird reappears . A boy in the audience becomes upset when he realizes the bird in the cage is n't the same as the one that reappears . tries to help the boy 's aunt , a woman named ( ) , to console him . After the show , we discover that the bird in the cage has to die to achieve the illusion , as is seen tossing the original bird in the trash . and strike up an acquaintance and become romantically involved . Disaster strikes during the next performance of the underwater escape . ties , stops , and then reties the knot around 's hands as they prepare to put her on the hoist . She ca n't manage to slip the knot underwater , and Cutter is n't able to break the glass of the tank in time to save her . dies onstage , leaving devastated and ruined . During the funeral , confronts , asking which knot he tied . His answer is that he " does n't know , " which can not accept . This is the beginning of their bitter rivalry . and both strike out on their own , but there are obvious tensions . marries and starts doing his own act , the climax of which is a bullet - catching trick . The secret , as explains to his pregnant wife , is that the bullet is palmed , so that it 's already in the magician 's hand when the gun is fired . All that comes out of the pistol is gunpowder . But magicians have died during the trick because of audience members sticking buttons or their own bullets into the guns . is next seen performing for a very rowdy audience . After whipping out the gun to silence the audience , he asks for volunteers , then hands the gun to a man who is actually a disguised . , knowing the trick , deliberately puts his own bullet into the gun , and confronts again about the knot he tied . When 's answer is still " I do n't know , " shoots him , blowing the ends of two fingers off his left hand and jeopardizing 's career . encourages him to quit magic . She is n't happy that keeps secrets from her as part of his trade . Their marriage is an uneven one , and she claims that when he says that he loves her , she can tell on some days he does n't mean it . admits this is true and they make a sad little game of it : some days he loves her , some days he loves the magic . One day at a bar , is approached by , whom no one will hire because of his association with . They start their own act , with performing as " the " ( a name suggested by his late wife and rejected at the time for being " too " ) . His lovely assistant is a blonde bombshell named ( ) . Because does n't want to get dirty , comes up with a new version of the " disappearing - bird - in - the - cage " trick where members of the audience keep their hands on the cage as it disappears . The trick involves mechanical gadgetry that wears under his suit to fold away and retract the cage . Best of all , the bird is unharmed . debuts the trick at his show . The audience is negative at first , complaining that they 've seen the trick numerous times , but says he 'll make it a bit harder . He asks for two volunteers to come up from the audience . Two are selected : an elderly woman and a man who is actually a disguised . Although recognizes the moment he puts his hand on the cage , he is unable to stop from jamming the machinery . The cage malfunctions , causing the bird to be killed onstage and the other volunteer 's hand to be caught . The theater owner cancels 's booking and 's reputation is left in tatters . Cutter sends to a science lecture to get some new ideas . is preparing to demonstrate several huge , fantastic coils , generating immense electric charges that seem to fill the room . Because of the perceived danger , the demonstration is canceled by the authorities . But Angier spots in the crowd and follows him , learning about and their new baby , . Fed by jealousy of 's happiness , which feels should have been his , 's obsession over the rivalry grows . Intercut with this storyline are 's attempts to meet with and commission his own transporter machine . has supplied all of with electrical service in exchange for being allowed full use of the generators at night ( when the residents are sleeping ) to conduct experiments . He 's even rigged up his own electric fence . When finally agrees to build the machine for , he warns that it will take a great deal of time and money . In 's diary , we learn that both magicians start performing again . , as " the , " has a dramatic new trick called the Transported that has been getting him attention . and , who is falling in love with her magician , watch it repeatedly and are unable to tell how he does it . The trick appears amazingly simple : gets into a cabinet on stage right and gets out of another cabinet on stage left . Cutter insists that he must be using a double , but insists that she can see the bandaged stumps on his left hand both when disappears and when he reappears , even though wears padded gloves to hide his short fingers . and copy the trick and add the bit of showmanship and flair that 's version is missing . In his version , throws his hat across the stage and walks through a door on one side of the stage , secretly drops through a trapdoor hidden behind the door frame onto a padded cushion , while a double simultaneously is hoisted out of another trapdoor behind the door on the other side of the stage to catch the hat . They hire an out - of - work actor named ( also played by ) to be 's double . He 's a drunk and a lout , but he can perform . Their act , dubbed " the , " is an amazing success . But there 's one small drawback : has to be the one who sells the buildup of the trick , so he 's always under the stage during the prestige and misses out on the audience reaction . is getting all the glory , even if Cutter makes sure that he keeps a low profile so the secret does n't get out . Even worse , still does n't know how does his version of the trick . decides to send to work for and spy on him to get the secret . , who is in love with him , does n't like the idea , but does as asks and becomes 's assistant . To gain his trust , she tells how 's trick is done and offers to help him improve on his own act . Meanwhile , a big problem develops -- with , of course . realizes that he can control because he 's necessary for 's biggest trick , and demands money . It turns out that has been influencing him , and thinks may have betrayed them . 's version of the " " has improved , and now includes one of 's electricity - generating machines . Cutter gets to agree to phase out the trick . 's performances get more intentionally sloppy , and one night he simply is n't there at all . When goes through the trapdoor , the cushion to break his fall has been removed , and he breaks his leg . He watches pop out of 's trapdoor and proceed to humiliate him , suspending a tied - up Root from the ceiling with an advertisement for 's own act , before running out of the theater to his own show . Angier confronts , who insists that 's trick is accomplished using a double , because she 's seen makeup and wigs lying around . He deduces that such items are planted by as misdirection for her . When he questions her loyalty , she produces 's encrypted diary as proof that she did n't betray him . However , the five - letter - word to decrypt the diary is still necessary . and kidnap , 's engineer , and nail him in a box to hold for ransom . When comes to the meeting place in a cemetery to get back , demands to know the secret of 's " " in exchange . writes down one word , " , " which will decode the diary , and suggests that he 's teleporting using a machine built . is then told that has been buried alive , and asks him how fast he can dig . leaves for to track down , for the second section of the narrative , while Cutter stays behind . He was shot by in the shoulder while nailing the box up , and does n't want to pursue the secret of the trick any further . refuses to meet with , and the latter learns that has run out of funding and is being hounded by his rival , . assures that money is no object and tells him in turn that the machine is already being built . 's private life starts falling apart . He 's having an affair with , and his wife is drinking because of their deteriorating marriage . At one point , he instructs to deal with his family while going to see . He appears to genuinely care for both women . eventually hangs herself in 's workroom , after trying to confront her husband about one of his secrets . In , and have been unsuccessfully testing the machine they built for . They 've zapped his top hat time after time with an impressive electrical apparatus , but the hat wo n't move an inch . comes to the end of 's diary and realizes that actually did betray him . She was in love with , but since he used her as a spy without concern for her feelings , she knew she did n't have a future with him . She gave the diary to prove her loyalty to , who wrote it for . The last entry in the diary tells him that " " was the keyword to decrypt the writing , which is true , but it 's not the secret to the trick at all . never built a teleportation machine for , and has been sent on a wild goose chase . He goes back to 's lab several times , where the scientist insists that he is capable of building a teleporter , but he never built one for . He tests the machine again , this time using 's precious black cat . warns not to harm the cat . , using the cat 's beautiful collar , chains the cat to the spot for the experiment , as thinks it may be a matter of needing something living . The cat does not like the procedure and hisses , but is completely unharmed . However , the cat does n't move at all , so leaves in disgust . Then the cat is freed and runs out the front door . As walks back through the woods , we revisit the first shot of the movie : a heap of top hats on the forest floor . And this time , there are two identical ( proved by the collar ) black cats among them . The machine has been working all along , but instead of moving an object from one place to the other , it creates a duplicate at the destination . and are amazed , moving from hat to hat and measuring them with calipers . When leaves , tells him to take his hat . He asks which hat is his and , smiling for the first time , says " They are all your hat . and continue to refine the machine now that they know how it works . They have to leave suddenly in the middle of the night when their lab is burned down by 's goons . However , in the care of the hotel manager , leaves a large , trapezoidal wooden box for , containing the components of the machine with instructions in a note . 's note cautions that using the machine is inviting 's doom and warns him to destroy the machine rather than use it . takes the box back to and reunites with . He 's ready to perform again , but this time he 's extremely secretive about his methods , hiring blind stage hands and not allowing backstage at any time . As he demonstrates to an influential promoter , he is zapped with electricity from the machine 's coil , disappears from plain sight , and then reappears up in the balcony , appearing to traverse the distance instantaneously . The show is a hit and is mystified . All he can tell is that 's trick involves a trapdoor , but he has no idea what 's going on under the stage . Every night , he can see the blind stagehands removing a box from the theater . A few nights later , at another performance , sneaks under the stage , as we saw in the prologue , and watches fall through the trapdoor into the tank and drown . It 's clear that did n't have anything to do with it , and he actually tries to save his rival 's life by attempting to break through the glass of the tank with a pipe . Cutter runs down under the stage and gets the wrong idea . is arrested . is confirmed dead with Cutter identifying the body . In his prison cell back in the present day , comes to the end of 's diary , which gloats that is being blamed for his death . believes the diary must be a fake , until he 's called out of his cell to say goodbye to and meet the collector who wants to buy his secrets . The collector , , is . is dismayed that he would go so far and involve his child in their rivalry . / refuses to help clear his name , and wo n't even take the secret of 's " " when bribed , telling him " mine is better . " swears he 'll get out and have his revenge , promising he 'll come for her . Cutter discovers alive when he calls on to offer him the machine , hoping to convince him to destroy it . Cutter quickly realizes that is remorseless about framing . He says he 's figured out the secret to 's version of " the " and thinks he 's gone too far . has one last visitor : . tells him what he 's learned , gives him the rubber ball he sometimes uses for tricks , and tells to go " live for both of us . brings the machine to , and as he leaves , we see arrive to confront . This is intercut with scenes of being hanged . dies just as shoots Angier . The camera pans up to reveal that " " has two missing fingers and 's face . finally realizes that the secret of 's " " was simple : had a twin brother , and they were switching back and forth between the double roles of and . One of them loved , and one of them loved . They both lived half of the same life , never telling anyone in order to maintain the illusion . In a flashback , it is shown that the unmutilated twin willingly let his brother amputate the ring and fingers on his left hand so that they could make the swaps without anyone telling the difference . , in a scene we 've seen before , is puzzled and worried as to why the wound looks new and bruised again ; distracts her by slamming a fist down and saying they ca n't afford a doctor . , who only ever cared about the glory of wowing an audience , went to far more terrible extremes . In his " , " he knowingly created a double of himself every time he used 's machine , and he rigged the trapdoor to drown the one onstage . He never knew if he would be the prestige or the man in the box . The room where the machine is being kept is filled with water tanks , all of which hold a drowned double of for every time he performed the trick . Several times , he mutters to himself a line we 've heard before in a different context : " No one cares about the man in the box . falls and kicks over the lantern as he dies from his wound , and the resulting fire ensures the machine and all the evidence are destroyed . We loop back to the trick with the small birds in the opening scene ( though this time , no birds are harmed ) while Cutter reiterates the three parts of a magic trick . As has told , " before the audience can clap , you have to make the disappeared man come back . " On cue , her father appears to reclaim her . She runs into his arms , and and exchange nods.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The films opens with ( ) playing the drums at of , the music school in and he 's just an alternate drummer in some school band . abruptly stops playing drums when the band conductor , ( ) appears at the door in front of him and asking some personal information of him . When asks why he stopped playing , he resumes playing drums . After he finishes playing , says he did not mean to resume playing then he asks to show his rudiments by playing the drums again . While plays drums , slams the door but he comes back to retrieve his forgotten jacket . The next day , enters one class aside from and there , he meets the drummer named ( ) . Shortly , the professor arrives and the class performs " 's " . sees the man ( presumably ) in silhouette looking at the door . After the class , peeks into one of the classrooms where the class is handled by , and he is being looked at by . Later , back at the , is playing drums as core drummer . Suddenly , breaks inside and becomes horrified of him . Fletcher conducts every saxophonist and bassist one by one and finally the drums . After that , tells to come and he is told to come at his room tomorrow at 6 in the morning . meets ( ) , the girl working at the cinema and invites her to go out with him . The next day , realizes that he is late for class . struggles and rushes quickly to the school , only he goes inside the empty classroom . knows that the class actually starts at 9 AM . waits three hours before the class . At exactly 9:00:00am , arrives and begins conducting the song called " . " During the band practice , Fletcher confronts then suddenly yells at a saxophonist named ( ) playing out - of - tune and angrily tells him to get out of the . This escalates 's abusiveness and wrath . has the class take a break . and have a conversation about his life and family . After the break , the class resumes . But when loses the patience of 's drum tempo , throws a chair at ( but he dodges it ) . Fletcher slaps every four in 12 counts he makes and he will not stop questioning until answers whether he is " dragging " or " rushing " . answers " rushing " then forces to tell the whole band that he is really upset , louder ! Fletcher then mocks about his parents being separated . Once again , tells that he is upset , louder . Thus , is being embarrassed and insulted . At his home , keeps practicing drums , making his hand bleed in the process . After the band performs at the competition , ( ) , core drummer , gives his music sheets to . neglects the music sheets to buy a can of at the automated vending machine . As is looking for his music sheets , they mysteriously disappear . ca n't play without the sheets . steps in , stating he knows the song , , by heart . plays well and earns 's spot . Thus , is the new core drummer . 's family is having dinner at his home and talks about his experience in . At the , the band is practicing the new song called " " which needs an extreme time stamp measure of 330 bpm . Fletcher dismisses the band except when discusses him about that note . Shortly , , whom met from the other class , arrives . plays the drums to test the ability of the tempo but his tempo fails while plays well . Therefore , takes as the new core drummer , but does not agree to this . Jealous , will be the core drummer if he earns the part . breaks up with , saying his ambition will only hinder their relationship . At his home , we see practicing drums harder with a pitcher of water with ice beside him in case he bleeds . As he fails to reach the required tempo , punches the drum in frustration and his hand is bleeding , dripping it in the pitcher of ice . At the , tearfully reveals in class that a talented former student of his , , has died in a car accident . The band rehearses " " , but struggles with the tempo ; auditions , and for hours while the class waits outside but the three fail to reach the required tempo . When it is now 's turn , kicks the chair then throws the drum away in wrath and even tells to increase the tempo . In this process , 's left hand is bleeding and the blood drips onto the drum set . After a one minute of playing , finally tells that he earned the part . On the way to a jazz competition , the bus that rode breaks down . So rents a car but he arrives late for rehearsal without his drumsticks . He drives back to the car rental office and retrieves the drumsticks , but as he speeds back , his car is hit by a truck . He crawls from the wreckage and despite his injury and bloodied face , he struggles to make into the jazz competition . With his left hand injured , he is unable to play and drops the drumstick to the floor . After that , says that he is done . attacks in front of the audience . is expelled from and contacted by a lawyer representing the parents of . The lawyer explains that actually hanged himself , having suffered anxiety and depression after joining 's class . 's parents want to prevent from teaching ; agrees to testify and is fired . goes to the club where he sees and the jazz performers . As the song ends , walks out of the club but calls him and having a chat with . explains that he pushes his students beyond the expected so they might achieve greatness . He invites to perform at festival concert with his band . agrees and invites , learning that she has a new relationship . On stage , tells he knows he testified against him , and in revenge , leads the band in a new piece was not given sheet music for . leaves the stage humiliated , but returns and begins playing " " , interrupting as he addresses the audience . The rest of the band joins him , and follows suit . ends the performance with an extravagant drum solo . is at first angry , but gives a nod of approval to as he finishes.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > In the early years of , 1941 , the Moroccan coastal city of attracts people from all over the world , particularly Nazi - occupied . Many are transients trying to get out of ; a few are just trying to make a buck . Most of them -- gamblers and refugees , , resistance fighters , and plain old crooks -- find their way to 's , a swank nightclub owned by American expatriate ( ) . Though we learn later that once harbored enough idealism to put himself at risk to fight fascism , he 's now embittered and cynical , professing to be neutral and detached : " I stick my neck out for nobody . "Ugarte ( ) comes to 's with letters of transit he obtained by killing two German couriers . The papers allow the bearer to travel freely around - controlled , including to neutral , ; from , it 's relatively easy to get to the . They are almost priceless to any of the refugees stranded in . plans to make his fortune by selling them to the highest bidder , who is due to arrive at the club later that night . However , before the exchange can take place , is arrested by the police under the command of ( ) . A corrupt official , accommodates the . Unknown to and the , had left the letters with for safekeeping , because " ... somehow , just because you despise me , you 're the only one I trust . "Through , is introduced to the small company of officers who oversee . Among them is ( ) , whom has come to for an inspection of his staff and who makes no effort to hide his suspicion of . goes so far as to ask if he can imagine the German war effort reaching the shores of the , even . gravely warns him that " there are certain sections of , , that I would n't advise you to try to invade . the reason for 's bitterness re - enters his life . ( ) arrives with her husband ( ) to purchase the letters . is a renowned leader who has escaped from a concentration camp . The letters are their only way to escape to to continue his work . At the time first met and fell in love with in , she believed her husband had been killed . When she discovered that he was still alive , she left abruptly without explanation and returned to , leaving feeling betrayed . After the club closes , returns to try to explain , but is drunk and bitterly refuses to listen . At different times and torment themselves by asking the club 's piano player , ( ) , to play As Goes By , a song they loved when they were together in . ( The famous line " Play it again , , " which refers to this song , does n't actually appear in the movie -- says " Play it , , " and later , orders " Play it ! " ) While plays the song , reminisces about his affair with in . Though she seems happy to be with , her mood near the end of their time together is cautious because she has learned her husband may not be dead . When the begin to close in on , she receives word that is indeed alive in another part of . She and had been planning to take a train to to escape the 's assault ; however , on the platform receives a handwritten letter from her . She writes that she ca n't explain why she 's leaving him but she loves him . and leave without her . The next night , , suspecting that has the letters , speaks with him privately about obtaining them . They 're interrupted when a group of officers , led by , 's piano and begin to sing " Die am " ( The on the ) , a German patriotic song . Infuriated , orders the house band to play " " in honor of . The band leader looks to for guidance ; he nods . starts singing , alone at first , then long - suppressed patriotic fervor grips the crowd and everyone joins in , drowning out the . In retaliation , orders to close the club . Later that night , confronts in the deserted cafe . He refuses to give her the documents , even when threatened with a gun . She is unable to shoot , confessing that she still loves him . decides to help , leading her to believe that she will stay behind when Laszlo leaves . is jailed on a minor charge . convinces to release , promising to set him up for a much more serious crime : possession of the letters of transit . However , double crosses , forcing him at gunpoint to assist in the escape . At the last moment , makes get on the plane to with her husband , telling her that she would regret it if she stayed : " Maybe not today . Maybe not tomorrow , but soon and for the rest of your life . drives up , tipped off by , but shoots him when he tries to intervene . When his men arrive , informs them that is dead and covers for by sharply ordering them to " round up the usual suspects . " He then recommends that they both leave . , suggesting they join the , walks into the fog with who says " , I think this is the beginning of a beautiful friendship . "</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The date is 25th , 1945 , shortly after the end of . A young boy sits against a pillar at , dying of starvation . Later that night , a janitor removes his body and digs through his possessions , finding nothing but a candy tin containing ashes and a few fragments of bone which he throws away into a nearby field . From the tin springs the spirit of the young boy followed by his little sister along with a cloud of fireflies . The spirit of the young boy , ( , : ) , narrates the story of how he and his sister , ( , : ) , fared in the wake of the firebombings of during the - year - old and 4 - year - old live with their mother ( ) , : ) comfortably in while their father serves as a captain in the . One day , air raid sirens go off as a fleet of American B-29 bombers flies overhead . The children 's mother , who suffers from a heart condition , puts in the care of her older brother and instructs him to secure the home while she goes ahead to a bomb shelter . Hundreds of incendiary bombs are dropped on the city and most of the civilians are caught off - guard . and manage to survive the bombing unscathed and go in search of their mother . They find her at a makeshift clinic set up within a school , horribly burnt and covered head to foot with bloody bandages . She dies a short time later and is cremated in a mass grave with other casualties . Despite their loss , is determined to care for and protect her at all costs . They travel to the home of their aunt ( , : ) who allows them to stay but convinces to sell his mother 's kimonos for rice . While living there , goes out to retrieve leftover supplies he had buried in the ground before the bombing and gives them all to his aunt , however , he keeps one tin of fruit drops for himself . The children 's aunt becomes increasingly bitter due to the hardships brought on by the war . She becomes resentful of the children as food rations shrink and she accuses on having done nothing to earn the food she cooks . Tired of his aunt 's insults , decides to leave with and care for her on his own . They find refuge inside an abandoned bomb shelter and release fireflies within for light . Come morning , is horrified to find that all the fireflies have died . She creates a grave for them in the dirt and realizes the depth of her understanding when she asks him why their mother had to die too . The children soon run out of rice and food and , unable to find work or other means , is forced to steal from local farmers ' homes during air raids . When he is caught , he comes to terms with his desperation and takes an increasingly ill to a doctor . The doctor informs that his sister is suffering from malnutrition but offers no help . Desperate , withdraws all of the money remaining in his mother 's bank account , hoping that it will be enough to treat or buy food . As he leaves the bank he becomes distraught when he learns from a nearby crowd that has surrendered to the . Not only that , but he finds that the ship his father captained has been sunk along with most of the . His father , who had once promised him that could never be defeated . returns to the bomb shelter with a heavy heart and large quantities of food only to find lying on the ground , hallucinating and trying to encourage to eat little rocks that she thinks are rice balls . hurries to prepare some food and gets to try a bit of watermelon . She thanks him and , exhausted , closes her eyes . She never wakes up . Using supplies donated to him by a local farmer , prepares a pyre and cremates his sister 's body . He places her ashes in the fruit drop tin which he keeps with him beside a picture of their father . A few weeks later , he finds himself in and dies of starvation . Illuminated by fireflies , the spirits of and are seen together , healthy and happy , as they look down on the modern city of > 

 < , " or " " has it is known in the , is a particularly painful and rather messy way of ending ones days . In this ritual , the performer opens his abdomen , starting from left to right and then finishing from top toward bottom . But there is no need to be left for hours contemplating ones entrails . Another swordsman acting as a second , called " , " is standing by to decapitate the departing at a pre - arranged moment in the ceremony . , who founded 's last great " shogunate " dynasty in 1603 , ordered the practice of harakiri to be discontinued by both secondary and primary retainers . Later on , in 1663 , a stronger edict from of , put an end to the practice altogether . By that time , the ritual had become an idle formalism , and the performer was decapitated at the instant he took his sword out of the scabbard , thus avoiding a painful death . In some instances , the sword was replaced by a fan!We are 13 , 1630 , in . Following the centralization of power by the in the early 17th , few feudal clans were allowed to remain , leading to a substantial downsizing ( but not off - shoring ) in the samurai profession . A scrawny former retainer of the of arrives at the gates of the official residence of . This mysterious and somber " ronin " ( un - retained samurai ) , ( ) , unemployed since the abolition of the in 1619 , requests the temporary hospitality of the in order to end his life as a worthy samurai by committing harakiri . is not the first ronin to come knocking at the door of one of the local remaining feudal clans with such a request , including one most recently at residence itself . In the beginning of this recession , the surviving clans were impressed by the steadfast " samurai " and generously turned them away with small alms . Unfortunately , this practice led to abuses on the part of some destitute ronin who faked the desire to commit " harakiri " in the hope of employment or of a small financial relief while retaining their lives ( one must not be too harsh in judging these poor fellows , remembering that in those days unemployment compensation did not yet exist).The elder , ( ) receives , but warns him against making such a request unless he is sincere . tells of a recent tragic incident involving another ronin , ( ) , who had come to the clan under the false pretence of committing harakiri with the hope of obtaining some money and being turned away safe and sound . Suspecting sincerity , the entrapped him by calling his bluff , and forced him to go through his harakiri . The ritual was even crueler , as , being totally destitute , had previously sold the razor - edged blades of his swords and replaced them with bamboo blades . Nevertheless , he was compelled to perform the ritual using these blades . The samurai carried a long sword and a short sword , each named differently depending on the occasion : " " or " katana " and " tanto " or " wakizashi " , respectively . These are the essential tools of his trade , and under no circumstances should he part with them , lest he become totally dishonored . Tsugomo is undeterred by this gruesome story and reaffirms his determination to commit harakiri . , thinking that this event will serve as a good example for the troupes and will reinforce their morale , agrees to the request . Tsugomo takes his position , sitting on a small platform , in the middle of a sand - covered courtyard , with his wakizashi in front of him . The members of the surround the courtyard and the ritual is presided over by the elder of the . Tsugomo asks to be seconded by the number one swordsman of the , ( ) . He happens not to be present that day , and a messenger is sent to his home to summon him back to the . In the meantime , , a superb storyteller , recounts the journey which brought him to this situation . Slowly , with a deep , gravelly voice , in a deliberate rhythm , he recalls his story , which could have been a bard reciting pages of the " " or of the " . " He recalls how his best friend , ( ( ) , also a retainer of the , committed harakiri upon being dismissed at the dissolution of the . He had left a note asking Tsugomo to adopt his young son , . grew up with own daughter and eventually married her . Tsugomos narration melts into flashbacks of his past life . As the messenger returns with the news that has taken a leave of absence and can not attend the ceremony , Tsugomo requests another kaishakunin , ( ) , but it turns out that he also happens not to be in attendance . Finally , names ( ) who , surprise , is also absent . , sensing a trap , but is still unable to comprehend the situation . He names a second himself , and orders for the ritual to proceed . Nevertheless , Tsugomo is able to buy enough time to finish his story . The family , although poor , was surviving until his daughter and grandchild became sick . And this is how , out of money , , decided to try his luck and went to the residence of . , exasperated , orders his men to attack . At that moment , Tsugomo reaches in his and throws on the ground three topknots , bearing the names of their former owners , who are none other than the three suggested seconds . In so doing , Tsugomo exposes the hypocrisy of these samurai , reminding his audience , To lose ones topknot is equivalent to losing ones life , a laxity and dishonor which even death can not wipe away!Tsugomo ends his narrative with recalling how he met , one by one , in duels with the three now - indisposed samurai , and having won each encountered , proceeded to take their topknots instead of their lives , a supreme humiliation for a samurai . The final duel with the star swordsman of the , , on the of - in , is like a meditation , a ballet of death . The film ends in a well - choreographed combat . In an ultimate effort , badly wounded , Tsugomo seizes the idol , the emblem and embodiment of the honor , above his head and sends it crashing at his feet . Fittingly , the " coup de grace " to seppuku is not dispensed by a gallant swordsman , but by a cowardly platoon of musket - carrying warriors . Even to the end , , the code of conduct of the samurai , is violated by the . The battlefield is cleaned up and the idol is restored and righted . The casualty report lists four dead and eight wounded . is the only one who commits harakiri . The two other seconds will be " harakiri - ed , " if necessary , by a delegation from the , on orders . All of these casualties , including , will be declared as having died from sickness and so appearances will be preserved , and " honor " will be > 

 < synopsis > The film begins at night in . ( ) is driving 's ( ) at high speed . They are soon chased by the police : when they are caught , , unfazed , doubles his bet with , convinced they can get an escort . In order to get away with his speeding , claims the quadriplegic must be urgently driven to the emergency room ; pretends to have a stroke and the fooled police officers eventually escort them to the hospital . As the police leave them at the hospital , asks what will they do now , to which answers : " Now let me take care of it . " as they drive off . The story of the two men is then told as a flashback , which takes up almost the rest of the film . , a rich quadriplegic who owns a luxurious Parisian mansion , and his assistant , are interviewing candidates to be his live - in carer . , a candidate , has no ambitions to get hired . He is just there to get a signature showing he was interviewed and rejected in order to continue to receive his welfare benefits . He is extremely casual and shamelessly flirts with . He is told to come back the next morning to get his signed letter . goes back to the tiny flat that he shares with his extended family in a bleak Parisian suburb . His aunt , exasperated from not hearing from him for six months , orders him to leave the flat . The next day , returns to 's mansion and learns to his surprise that he is on a trial period for the live - in carer job . He learns the extent of 's disability and then accompanies in every moment of his life , discovering with astonishment a completely different lifestyle . A friend of 's reveals 's criminal record which includes six months in jail for robbery . states he does not care about 's past because he is the only one that does not treat him with pity or compassion , but as an equal . He says he will not fire him as long as he does his current job properly . Over time , and become closer . dutifully takes care of his boss , who frequently suffers from phantom pain . discloses to Driss that he became disabled following a paragliding accident and that his wife died without bearing children . Gradually , is led by to put some order in his private life , including being more strict with his adopted daughter , who behaves like a spoiled child with the staff . discovers modern art , both traditional and modern , and opera , and even takes up painting . For 's birthday , a private concert of classical music is performed in his living room . At first very reluctant , is led by to listen more carefully to the music and opens up to 's music . then plays the music he likes to ( , by , & ) , which opens up everybody in the room to dance . discovers that has a purely epistolary relationship with a woman called , who lives in . encourages him to meet her but fears her reaction when she discovers his disability . eventually convinces to talk to on the phone . agrees with to send a photo of him in a wheelchair to her , but he hesitates and asks his aide , , to send a picture of him as he was before his accident . A date between and is agreed . At the last minute is too scared to meet and leaves with before arrives . then calls and invites him to travel with him in his private jet for a paragliding weekend . gives an envelope containing 11,000 euros , the amount he was able to get for 's painting , which he sold to one of his friends by saying it was from an up - and - coming artist . , 's younger cousin , who is in trouble with a gang , takes refuge in 's mansion . opens up to about his family and his past as an orphan in , who was adopted by his then - childless aunt and uncle and brought back to . His adoptive parents later began having children of their own , his uncle died and his aunt bore still more children . recognizes 's need to support his family and releases him from his job , suggesting he " may not want to push a wheelchair all his life" . Driss returns to his suburbs , joining his friends , and manages to help his younger cousin . Due to his new professional experience , he lands a job in a transport company . In the meantime has hired carers to replace , but he is n't happy with any of them . His morale is very low and he stops taking care of himself . becomes worried and contacts , who arrives and decides to drive in the , which brings the story back to the first scene of the film , the police chase . After they have eluded the police , takes straight to the seaside . Upon shaving and dressing elegantly , and arrive at a restaurant with a great ocean view . suddenly leaves the table and says good luck to for his lunch date . does not understand , but a few seconds later , arrives . Emotionally touched , looks through the window and sees outside , smiling at him . The film ends with bidding farewell and walking away.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > 's last ' silent ' film , filled with sound effects , was made when everyone else was making talkies . turns against modern society , the machine age , ( The use of sound in films ? ) and progress . Firstly we see him frantically trying to keep up with a production line , tightening bolts . He is selected for an experiment with an automatic feeding machine , but various mishaps leads his boss to believe he has gone mad , and is sent to a mental hospital - When he gets out , he is mistaken for a communist while waving a red flag , sent to jail , foils a jailbreak , and is let out again . We follow through many more escapades before the film is out.Colin & > 

 < synopsis > In the desert of during the waning days of the , three gunmen ( , , ) approach an isolated train depot ; two are wearing duster overcoats . The men take over the station and settle in to wait for the train . When the train finally comes , a nameless harmonica - playing stranger ( ) gets off and asks for someone named . They tell him sent them in his place . In the ensuing showdown , all four men go down . Only the man with the gets up again . The soundtrack to the opening scene is a creative orchestration of ordinary sounds in the style of . uses dripping water , the clicking of a telegraph , a buzzing fly , and over all the persistent , annoying squeak of a windmill - powered pump to build tension , punctuate visual jokes , and emphasize the tedium of waiting for the train . The scant dialog allows the soundtrack to consume much more of our attention than a score usually does . On a remote farm called , ( ) and his children are preparing an outdoor wedding feast . tells his son to drive into town to pick up his new mother , who is arriving by train from . Suddenly shots ring out from the desert , and 's daughter , son , and himself are slain . The youngest , , runs out of the house to find that his entire family has been destroyed . He watches in terrified silence as a group of five gunmen in duster overcoats emerge from the scrub brush . When one of the men calls their leader by name , asking what to do with the child , ( ) draws his pistol and slowly takes aim at the last remaining witness . With a self - satisfied grin , he pulls the trigger . In the town of , 's bride ( ) steps down from the train to find that no one is there to meet her . Giving up hope , she steps through the train station into the bustling new town still being built . She hires a carriage to drive her to . The farm 's name draws laughter from the driver , ( ) , who informs her that " " is a worthless piece of ground , and is crazy for trying to farm it . Along the way , speeds through a group of railroad workers busily laying their " damn rails . " Then he stops at a wayside / tavern / trading post , and follows him inside . Her beauty draws the unwelcome attentions of the barman ( ) . After a noisy off - screen gun battle , the outlaw ( ) enters wearing shackles on his wrists . The sounds of a harmonica again reveals the presence of the nameless stranger , who has been watching from a dark corner of the tavern . dubs him " , " and he uses 's gun to force another patron to shoot apart the chain between his wrists . 's men soon arrive , too late to help him escape the prison guards who now lie dead outside . notes that the three men he killed earlier were wearing the same duster overcoats as 's men , and is annoyed that rivals may be copying his trademark dusters . and arrive at to find a crowd of somber wedding guests standing around the outdoor tables , now put to use as funeral biers . is horrified at the carnage . When one of the women bemoans that this should happen to the " poor little miss " on her wedding day , informs the guests that she and were married a month earlier in . As the burial comes to an end , the crowd discovers that the torn - off collar of a duster overcoat was found on a nail by the door . This marks the massacre as 's work . The men form a posse and ride off to track down the outlaw and hang him . Sam offers to drive back to , but she says she will stay at . That evening , she ransacks the household , looking for anything of value that might have been hidden away . At the town laundry in that night , puts the laundry man through a violent interrogation , wanting to know why did n't show up at the train . does n't know ; he only arranged the meeting . suspects was occupied at 's farm just then , but insists otherwise : " did that job -- everyone knows that . We got proof . " does n't believe it : " That was always one of 's tricks -- faking ' evidence . finds a group of miniature buildings stored away in a trunk , including a model train station with a fancy swinging sign that says " . " She hears the sound of a outside and fires a shotgun into the darkness . The sound of the moves farther away . In the morning as she is about to leave for good , she finds on her doorstep . While his men wait outside , he barges in and asks for coffee . He tells of being chased by the posse all night and helps make the fire for the coffee . He says he would never kill a kid : " I ai n't the mean bastard people make out . " He decided to come take a look at the scene of his supposed crime . Not only is he annoyed that someone is trying to blame him , but neither he nor can understand why the killings happened at all . The place looks so worthless , he imagines that must have hidden a treasure away somewhere . tells him that if so , she could n't find it . Aware that she is vulnerable to any sort of mistreatment and his men might deal out , she serves the coffee . In a private railroad car , ( ) , a crippled and dying railroad tycoon , berates for killing the . He only wanted to scare , not kill him . And now a has shown up , making the killings pointless . began building his railroad in sight of the , and he means to build his way to the before he dies . He hired to " remove small obstacles from the tracks , " but intends to become a wealthy businessman himself . tells he will never be like , because does n't understand that money is more powerful than guns . After having sex with , finishes his coffee and rides away with his men . takes her traveling bags out to the wagon . But is there and demands that she stay . As he throws her down roughly and begins ripping at her clothes , becomes alarmed . Instead of harming her , he simply removes the white trimmings from her black dress , leaving her in full mourning . They go to the well for a drink of water , only to be attacked by two more of 's men . kills them , and from a nearby vantage point sees how handy is with a gun . goes to the laundry and asks to tell she knows everything and wants to negotiate with personally . denies knowing anyone named , but repeats her demand and leaves . heads out to 's private train , unaware that is following him . scolds him for coming there , but says he was n't followed , and he thought and would want to know about . When sees 's shadow on the ground , he knows someone is on the roof , and he signals the train to start moving . Stopping in open country , captures . A blurry flashback appears of an indistinct man walking through a desert landscape , but no explanation is given ) . has brought on board and bound . He kicks off the train ( literally ) and shoots him down just as is about to reveal the presence of hiding in the train 's undercarriage . lets know that the two men he sent to kill are themselves dead . Realizing this is the man who wanted to meet with him , asks who he is . answers with the names of two men has killed . interrupts the interrogation to remind he has more urgent business : the woman . Taking to horseback , rides away with three of his men to do away with himself . He leaves three men behind on the train to guard and keep an eye on , whom he does n't trust . tells the men to meet him at the cliff , and the train gets under way again . Over the next few minutes , craftily disposes of the three gunmen one by one and sets free . They now have in their power , but they will deal with him later , choosing to stop the train and ride to 's aid . At , is puzzled by the arrival of a large amount of lumber and building supplies that ordered . Since he paid cash , it all belongs to her . Neither the lumberman nor can say what it 's for , but there are enough materials to build at least eight buildings . When the lumberman shows her a blank sign and asks if she knows what should go on it , she recognizes its outline from the miniature train station and tells him it should say " . " Inside the house , she looks through the trunk again for the model train station . Just then , captures her . At the cliff , offers to buy to avoid more killing -- he 's had enough of 's butcher tactics . He does n't have time to compete with . But away from his train , looks weak and pathetic , no competition at all as far as is concerned . kicks one of his crutches out from under him , sending sprawling face first : " I could squash you like a wormy apple . " tells some of his men to take back to his train and watch him . At , and his men are just as puzzled by the building supplies as is . paces off the dimensions of a train station while explaining to what he has seen in a document : was planning to build a town at , which has the only water supply for fifty miles west of . Since trains need lots of water for their boilers , the railroad must inevitably come through . contracted for the rights to operate the depot himself , provided it was built by the time the tracks reached it . Knowing that the rail gangs are just over the hill , puts his men to work building the station . Inside a ruin at the cliff , enjoys sex with his captive . He remarks that she will do anything to stay alive and that it seems she ca n't resist a man 's touch , even the touch of the man who killed her husband . knows from inquiries sent over the telegraph that was one of the most popular prostitutes in until she married . As he undresses her , he thinks of marrying her himself to take over the land . Realizing he would make a bad husband , he comes up with a quicker , simpler solution . sits in quiet resignation in the saloon at , where people have gathered for a land auction . One of 's men hovers over her , and several more are scattered through the crowd , ready to intimidate anyone who even starts to make a bid . It 's 's way of getting the property for himself cheaply . The sheriff ( ) reluctantly gets the auction under way . Meanwhile , aboard his train , senses that his dream of seeing the is growing remote . He joins a game of poker with four of 's men who are now his captors . Instead of dealing out cards , he deals out five hundred dollars to each of the men to buy their allegiance to him . Back at the land auction , one of 's still - loyal men bids five hundred dollars for the farm . Just as the sheriff is about to close the sale , calls out a bid of five thousand dollars . In what is most likely a scheme devised by both men , brings in an indignant at gunpoint and turns him in for the reward money to cover his bid . The sheriff puts under guard on the train bound to , where there is a new , strong , modern prison that is much more secure than the local jail . But two of 's men follow him onto the train after buying one - way tickets to the next station . Meanwhile , one of the men on 's train rides into town to tell the others what transpired in the poker game . is grateful that has saved the farm for her , and she begins to look at him more warmly . enters the saloon and offers five thousand dollars for the farm , plus one silver dollar profit . Again he asks 's name , and answers with the names of two more dead men : " They were all alive until they met you , . " Again the blurred flashback appears , but the image of walking through the desert becomes clearer than before . rejects the offer but uses 's silver dollar to pay for his drink . Having noticed suspicious activity outside , goes to watch from the upstairs windows and balcony , breaking into the room where is taking a steamy bath . steps out of the saloon onto the street -- and into a deadly cat - and - mouse game . His former men , now 's men , try to gun him down . But with some timely assistance from , manages to kill them instead and rides out . is furious at for saving 's life . He tells her , " I did n't let them kill him and that 's not the same thing . discovers the aftermath of a gun battle at 's train . Bodies of 's men and 's men lie strewn along the tracks and in 's private car . He finds crawling desperately to a nearby mud puddle . draws and cocks his gun to finish him off but then decides to let him suffer . dies with the sound of ocean waves crashing in his mind . The track laying crew is reaching at last , and construction crew are busily turning the stacks of lumber into the beginnings of a town . sits at the gate as comes riding awkwardly in and goes inside . Not quite his usual self , he again asks for coffee , which has ready this time . They both sense that outside something important is about to happen with . : " He 's whittling ' on a piece of wood . I got a feeling ' when he stops whittling ' , something 's gon na happen . rides up to the gate , and stops whittling . They exchange a few words . admits he 'll never be a businessman : " Just a man . " They acknowledge they 're of an ancient race being killed off by the coming of the modern age -- arriving right next to them as they speak . Then gets to the business between them : " The future do n't matter to us . Nothin' matters now -- not the land , not the money , not the woman . I came here to see you . 'Cause I know that now you 'll tell me what you 're after . ""Only at the point of dying ' , " tells him . says , " I know , " and they stride out into the farmyard to face off for the final showdown . Inside , begins to clean up and shave while he watches the railroad move up . He tells she should take water out to the workers at the tracks , letting them enjoy the sight of a beautiful woman . And if one of them should pat her behind , she should just make believe it 's nothing . They earned it . As and square up a few feet apart , preparing to duel , remembers his history with , in the flashback , a young strides out of the desert to the isolated ruin of a Spanish mission -- a lone arch with a bell hanging at the top . He places a brand - new harmonica into a young man 's mouth , telling him to keep his loving ' brother happy . The youth 's hands are bound behind him , and his older brother , also bound , is standing on his shoulders with a noose around his neck . and his men wait for the inevitable moment when the boy 's legs will give way and complete the hanging . The doomed man curses and kicks his younger brother away . The harmonica drops out of the young man 's mouth as he falls into the dust . and draw and shoot . turns around and staggers a few steps before he falls to the his knees . He asks again , " Who ... who are you ? " In answer , places the old , beaten - up into 's mouth . 's remembers -- he sees the image of the boy falling into the dust and the dropping out of his mouth . falls lifelessly into the dust and the drops out of his mouth . tells he 's not the right man for her , but neither is . There 's something inside a man like that , he tells her , something to do with death . Once has dealt with , he will come inside , pick up his things and move on . comes in and , true to 's prediction , picks up his belongings and tells he has to go . is wearing a dress whose top reveals her cleavage . They share a lingering look , and then he opens the front door and surveys the developing street scene outside . " It 's going to be a beautiful town , , " he says . hopes he will come back someday . With a doubtful " , " leaves . too says goodbye and pats on the behind , telling her to make believe it 's nothing . As the two men ride away , pauses and gets off his horse before dropping to the ground . discovers that has been gut - shot , the work of himself during the gun battle at the train . asks to go away -- he does n't want to see him die . turns away and soon hears fall over dead . Just then , the work train rolls into and stops at the station , which has its " " sign in place . takes 's body away as carries water out to the newly arrived railroad workers.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > " " ( ) recuperates from a broken leg during a sweltering summer . As a successful photographer , he 's known for taking difficult pictures no one else can get , including the one of an out - of - control race car which smashed his camera and broke his leg an instant after it was snapped . Jeffries lives in a small apartment , and spends his time in a wheelchair looking out the rear window into the courtyard of the building ; he can also see into the lives of all his neighbors , catching glimpses of their daily routines . It 's the sort of thing only an invalid might do , watching them eat , clean , sleep and argue . There 's the girl who exercises in her underwear , the married couple who sleep on their small balcony to beat the heat , the struggling songwriter working at his piano ; and there 's the salesman who lives across the courtyard from Jeffries , the one with the nagging bedridden wife . They seem to fight all too often . Every day a therapist comes to visit , dispensing her mature wisdom and berating him for sitting there all day spying on his neighbors . ( ) tells him she can smell trouble coming . He should get his mind off his neighbors and think about marrying that beautiful girlfriend of his . replies that he 's not ready for marriage . " Sure , she 's a wonderful girl , but she 's also a rich , successful socialite " , and lives the life of a war correspondent , always on the go , usually living out his suitcase and often in an unpleasant environment . It 's not the life he wants to offer her . " Well " says , " that girl is packed with love for you right down to her fingertips . ""That Girl " arrives shortly after leaves . ( ) breezes in wearing a stunning satin dress , looking every inch the beautiful socialite she is , and obviously very much in love with . They have dinner , but soon enough the conversation turns to the future , and they quarrel . sees no way they can reconcile their different lifestyles , and she walks to the door , telling him goodbye . " When will I see you again ? " asks Jeffries . "Not for a long time , " she replies sadly . " At least , not until tomorrow night . "The night drags by , and it 's too hot for Jeffries to sleep . It starts to rain . He dozes in his wheelchair by the window , but notices activity across the yard . The salesman goes out carrying his heavy silver sample case , and Jeffries looks at his watch : it 's 1:55am . The blinds in the bedroom are drawn , so Jeffries ca n't see the wife . Later at 2:35am , the salesman returns , lifting the case easily , as if it were empty . A minute later , he once more goes out in the rain in the middle of the night , lugging the heavy case , but coming home with it lighter . Intrigued , wonders what the salesman is doing , but he finally dozes off around daybreak . At daybreak , the salesman is seen leaving his apartment with a woman wearing all black clothing whose face we can not see . However , is fast asleep and does not notice the salesman and the mysterious woman leave . Discussing the incident with , and then later with , they all begin to watch the salesman . With the blinds now open , they can see that the wife is gone . Jeffries pulls out his binoculars , and then a large telephoto lens to get a better look . Jefferies watches as the salesman goes into the kitchen and cleans a large knife and saw . Later , he ties a large packing crate with heavy rope , and has moving men come and haul the crate away . Stella runs around the front of the building to catch the name of the moving company , but misses the truck . By now they 're all thinking the same thing ; there 's foul play going on , and the missing wife has been murdered by the salesman . They check his name on the front of the building : ( Burr).Jeffries calls in an old buddy - ( ) who 's now a police detective , and explains the situation to him . Naturally he does n't believe a word of it , and tells Jeffries to stick to photography . That evening , after further checking , the detective finds that is in the country , has sent a postcard to her husband , and the packing crate they had seen was full of her clothes . Chastened , they all admit to being a little ghoulish , even disappointed when they find out there was n't a murder after all . Jeffries and settle down for an evening alone , but soon a scream pierces the courtyard . One of the neighbors had a little dog they would let roam around the yard , and now it 's dead with it 's neck is broken . It had been digging in 's small flower garden . All of the neighbors rush to their windows to see what 's happened , except for one . Jeffries notices that sits unmoving in his dark apartment , with only the tip of his cigarette glowing . The following evening , notices a change in 's small flower garden in the courtyard : using a slide he 'd taken about two weeks before he discovers that the zinnia that the dog had been digging around is now a few inches shorter . suspects that had buried something there and had dug it up after murdering the dog . Convinced that is guilty after all , they slip a letter under his door asking " What have you done with her ? " and then watch his reaction . delivers the note and slips away before can find her . When she returns to the apartment , excited , has a look of excitement on his face as well , realizing that is a courageous woman who likely could accompany him in his adventurous life . Calling 's apartment , tells to meet him at a bar down the street , as a pretext to getting him out of the apartment . When leaves , and grab a shovel and start digging , but after a few minutes , they find nothing . Refusing to give up , climbs the fire escape to 's apartment and squeezes in an open window , much to ' alarm . Rummaging around the apartment , finds 's purse and wedding ring , things she surely would never have left behind on a trip . She holds them up for Jeffries to see , but he can only watch in terror as comes back up the stairs to the apartment . is trapped . Calling the police as goes in , he and watch helplessly as tries to hide , but is found by moments later . They see her try to talk her way out , but grabs and begins to assault her . Terrified by their helplessness , they can only watch as he turns out the lights and listen as screams for help . The police arrive and beat on 's door , saving just in time . Jeffries watches from across the courtyard as the police question , then arrest her . Her back is to him , and he see her hands behind her back pointing to 's ring , which is now on her finger . sees this as well , and realizing that she 's signaling to someone across the way , looks up directly at Jeffries with murderous understanding . Pulling back into the dark , calls his detective friend , who agrees to help get out of jail , and is now convinced that is guilty of something . takes all the cash they have for bail and heads for the police station . Jeffries is left alone , and looking back over to 's apartment , he sees all the lights are off . Down below , he hears the door to his own building slam shut , then slow footsteps begin climbing the stairs . is coming for him , and he 's trapped in his wheelchair . Looking for a weapon , he can find only the flash for his camera . He grabs a box of , and under his door he watches the hall lights go off . Footsteps stop outside his door , then it slowly opens . stands in the dark looking at . " Who are you ? " he says heavily . " What do you want from me ? " Jeffries does n't answer , but as comes for him he sets off the flash , blinding for a few seconds . He is slowed but not stopped , and keeps setting off in 's face , but he finally fumbles his way to ' wheelchair , then grabs him and pushes him towards the open window . Fighting to stay alive , Jeffries can not stop , and is pushed out . Hanging onto the ledge , yelling for help , he sees , the detective and the police all rush in . is pulled back , but it 's too late ; Jeffries slips and falls just as the police run up beneath him . Luckily , they break his fall , and sweeps him up in her arms . Thorwald confesses to the murder of his wife , and the police take him away . A few days later the heat has lifted . The camera pans across the other apartments , and there is an amusing end - tale for each one . Jeffries sleeps peacefully in his wheelchair , now with two broken legs from the fall . reclines happily next to him , now wearing blue jeans and a simple blouse , and reading a camping book . She smiles at him as he sleeps , but pulls out a hidden fashion magazine from under the > 

 < synopsis > 'S VERSIONBeginning at the end , the movie opens with 's mother trying to inform him of the death of . , a filmmaker who has not been home since his youth , leaves immediately to attend the funeral . Through flashbacks we watch in his youth , in a post town in . As a young boy he is called and he has a strong affinity for the cinema . Toto often sneaks into the movie theater when he should n't and harasses the projectionist , , in attempts to get splices of film that are cut out by the church because they contain scenes of kissing . Toto has a younger sister and war widowed mother who often struggle due to the loss of 's father . is banned from the movie theater by his mother when his film bits accidentally catch fire and nearly kill his sister along with burning up the only picture has of his father along with other family photographs . Eventually he sneaks his way back and forms a father - son bond with , despite 's reluctancy , even learns how to run the projector . Meanwhile one of the wins the lotto and becomes a rich man . One day in the cinema , after leaves to watch the movie with his friends below , the film catches fire in the projector and knocks out . rescues from death in the fire , unfortunately the cinema burns down and loses his sight . Lucky the lotto - lucky - townsman pays to have a new cinema put up . Since already knows how to run the projector he works with in the projection room . Some years pass and is now a young man . A rich girl , , comes to town and and his friends vie for her attention . Salvatore films her and begins to fall in love . advises him to steer clear of love because it only causes pain . Despite his warning , confesses his love to , who 's reply is that she does not , but she could . So he waits , every night outside her house for her reply . One day he gives up and trudges home depressed and upset only to soon discover that does love him in return . They begin a passionate romance , like that of two newlyweds . Unfortunately , 's father does n't approve and so he takes away . All summer they try to meet , sometimes successfully , sometimes not . On one particular day he tries to reach her and she him but their paths do n't cross . As we discover later , catches and convinces her to leave alone out of love . Salvatore then wanders without purpose and eventually joins the military due to the requirement by Italian law that all male youths serve for a period of time in the army . When he returns to his home town , all has changed and he can not adjust . urges him to leave and tells him that if he were to ever return , he would not see him . Obviously goes on to become a successful filmmaker . As he wanders the remains of his town after the funeral he sees a vision of just as she was when they were young ; he realizes it is 's daughter and follows her to 's home where he sees that she married one of 's childhood friends , a dunce when knew him . He confronts and they meet . They talk and she reveals to him that she did n't miss out on their fateful reunion but rather that convinced her to leave . Salvatore realizes what a role had in shaping his life and that knew that if he stayed with he would have no chance to pursue his love of film and so by going to to become a filmmaker he sacrificed his love for . and say farewell and go their separate ways . Salvatore returns to with a can of film left to him by . It contains all the splices of the kissing scenes from 's youth.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The opening credits appear in front of a large planet with rings . Out in the far reaches of deep space the , a commercial towing space vehicle , carrying a refinery with twenty million tons of mineral ore , is en route to with a crew of seven . Inside , the ship appears eerily quiet , but suddenly , the on - board computer is activated . Lights inside the ship are activated , and a room with seven biobeds is illuminated . The canopies open to awaken the crew . ( ) is the first to awaken from . They congregate in the mess hall , where they cheerfully enjoy a meal . ( ) and ( ) take the opportunity to discuss the bonus system , which they find unfair , as they get paid less than the officers . ( ) is called away by , the ship 's computer , before they can have a meaningful conversation . enters the console room , and tries to assess the situation , as the rest of the crew gets in the cockpit of the ship to determine their location . They quickly deduce that they are nowhere near home yet . ( ) finds out that they are at , an outlying system . When and return from their round of the lower deck , complaining about their colleagues ' attitude and the bonus system , briefs the crew : the ship is not even halfway home , and has altered its course because it has picked up an unknown signal , which repeats every 12 seconds . The crew has been awoken from hypersleep to investigate . protests , arguing that they 're not a rescue team and that they should be compensated for the extra work , but ( ) stipulates that per contract , the crew is obliged to investigate any signal from an intelligent source ; non - compliance will result in loss of pay , which quickly puts in a more cooperative mood . The crew assembles in the cockpit to listen to the signal . It sounds very strange and unearthly , perhaps like a voice . Lambert homes in on it and finds that it comes from a planetoid , 1200 km in diameter , with a two - hour rotation and some gravity . The approaches the planet , which is close to one enormous ringed planet and two smaller ones . The ship separates from the refinery , and sets course to the planet 's surface . It descends toward the planet , but the landing is rough , causing damage that will take some time for and to repair ( although they allot themselves several more hours than their own estimate ) . The planet is windy , and visibility is low . As the source of the signal is 2000 meters away and the sun is coming up , and decide to investigate on foot . A reluctant is ordered to join . takes place behind an outer window with a communication console , as the team puts on their space suits and leave the ship to investigate the signal on the planet 's windy surface . In the meanwhile , ( ) has gone to the lower deck to inspect the repairs . and ask if there will be a bonus for any discovery which is made on the surface ; assures them that the law guarantees them a share , before returning upstairs , as they keep teasing her . Outside , the team walks between the rocks , through the planetoid 's inhabitable atmosphere . Inside the ship , tells that has not yet deciphered the signal ; she volunteers to give it a try . accesses a console and starts working on the strange signal . Outside , the sun is up and the wind has died down . The team clears the rock formation , and makes a fascinating discovery . Near the horizon , they see a derelict spacecraft of unknown origin . It is lying against the rocks , vaguely shaped like a horseshoe . Despite 's hesitation , they approach it , losing contact with the upon entering the massive ship through an opening at the side . Inside , they find hallways with walls textured like bones . At the end is an elevated platform . It carries the remains of an enormous alien creature in a large chair , now fossilized . Upon initial examination , there is evidence of some unknown trauma to its chest : its ribs are bent outward , as if it exploded from the inside . wants to leave . then draws the others ' attention to a large hole in the floor . Meanwhile , analysis of the unidentified transmission suggests that it is not an , but a warning . wants to go after the search party , but talks her out of it , reasoning that by the time she gets there , the search team will probably know what the signal means . is lowered into the hole by means of a winch . He finds an enormous tube - like chamber down below , divided into sections and basins . He nears one basin , discovering thousands of leathery objects that resemble large eggs . He also discovers a strange light and mist covering the eggs that reacts when broken . He trips and falls into the pit , but is uninjured and moves in to investigate further . touches one of the eggs , which seems to give a shriek . He illuminates the egg from behind with a flashlight and discovers movement inside . He grabs a pistol : a strange , spider - like organism is the resident . The egg has flaps on top which open , revealing its insides . As moves into for a better look , the strange lifeform inside suddenly leaps out , attaching itself to 's helmet , melting his faceplate . is looking towards the planet 's surface , when he sees and carrying the unconscious back to the . They enter the airlock and ask to let them in , while waits at the inner airlock door to open it . They inform that an organism has attached itself to 's face . hesitates , citing quarantine protocol : for the safety of the crew , should first be decontaminated for 24 hours before being brought on board . fears for 's life and orders her to open the door , but she refuses , despite trying to pull rank . However , disregards 's decision and lets them in . In the infirmary , and cut 's helmet open : they find that a spider - like creature has attached itself to 's face , with eight finger - like legs , and a long tail tightly wrapped around his neck . Despite his mouth being blocked , is breathing normally . , and observe through a window . joins them , and is angrily slapped by a furious for not allowing them to re - enter the ship ; the men break the women apart . berates for disobeying a direct order , but furiously replies that she was just following the rules of quarantine protocol . attempts to remove the creature from 's face with a pair of forceps , but it merely tightens its grip , and is holding on so tight that it will tear 's skin off with it . is examined with a sophisticated medical scanner , which shows that the creature has inserted a tube into 's throat and is feeding him oxygen . deduces that since is comatose and the parasite is feeding him oxygen , removing the creature may kill , however is willing to take the risk . tries to cut off one of its legs with a scalpel , but a yellowish fluid pours out of the wound and begins to eat through the floor . Out of concern that the acidic fluid will breach the hull , the crew runs several floors downstairs , and find that the stuff 's corrosive effect is neutralized after burning through several decks . says the substance resembles molecular acid , and comments the creature must be using it for blood . " Wonderful defense mechanism - you do n't dare kill it " , growls . orders everyone back to their posts , as is left in his coma to be tended by . and resume their repairs , commenting that they should never have landed on the planet . As 's situation remains unchanged , is collecting data on the creature . He is startled by the sudden presence of in the infirmary . She wants to know what he has found out yet . can only confirm that the creature 's skin is made up of polysaccharides , which it is slowly replacing with silicon to toughen its hide against the new environment it finds itself within . then confronts him with his decision to let it aboard , ignoring the quarantine law ; defends himself by stating that he did it out of concern for 's life , and that he temporarily forgot the fact that is the officer in charge when and are away . replies that by allowing this breech of protocol , he has put all of their lives at risk , which is not appropriate behavior for a science officer . coldly lets her know that he is perfectly capable to make that decision , and she should stick to her own job . Ripley leaves . is sitting in the 's escape shuttle , the , listening to music , when he is called to the infirmary by , because something has happened to . The creature has detached from 's face on its own , and has disappeared . , and search the infirmary , and find it when it suddenly drops from an overhead compartment on ; it appears to be dead , only showing basic reflexes . They take a closer look at it , and confirm it is dead . wants to get rid of it , fearing that it may become even more harmful when dead ; strongly disagrees , given the uniqueness of the specimen . He wants to take it back to for more tests , as it is harmless now . shares 's sentiment , but leaves the decision to , to 's amazement . tries to talk some sense into , who is unwilling to listen to her arguments , replying that he only runs the ship , and has the final word on all things concerning the Company 's science division . asks if has ever worked with before . mentions that he did five tours with the same science officer , but this person was suddenly replaced two days before the left dock back on . admits she does n't trust , but responds that he does n't trust anybody . He asks about the status of repairs , which are still underway , but appear completed enough to leave the planetoid . Even though does not recommend it , prefers to leave as soon as possible . After a successful take - off and despite some minor technical errors , the ship docks with the refinery and cargo in orbit . The then resumes its course for . The crew is back in the mess hall , bickering again about what to do with . decides they will all get back into hypersleep . has calculated that it will take another 10 months to get back to , which spoils their moods even further . suddenly calls to the infirmary . has awoken , still groggy but seemingly unharmed . He remembers very little of the event , apart from a nightmare about smothering , but is starved and wants to eat . The crew decides to have one last meal before they re - enter hypersleep . During the meal , the crew is finally having a good time again , joking and enjoying the food . is eating like he has not had food in ages , sharply observed by . Suddenly , begins to choke . After initially thinking he has swallowed something bad , the mood suddenly changes when starts to groan and convulse violently . While he lies writhing and screaming on the table , the crew tries to help and stabilize him , but a bloodstain suddenly appears on the front of 's shirt . The executive officer then violently thrashes about several times despite the crew 's efforts to help him , and with one horrified scream , he goes silent . A small head about the size of a man 's fist bursts through the front of 's chest . It silently observes its surroundings . moves in to kill it with a knife , but he is stopped by . The creature screeches , then uses its tail to propel itself clear of the table and disappear down a hallway , leaving the crew stunned and horrified . A quick search through the deck yields no results whatsoever . After a short funeral for , where his body is jettisoned into space , the crew members separate into two teams to capture the small creature . assembles a weapon similar to a cattle prod , while rigs together a tracking device . , and investigate one of the lower decks , finding that the power has been disrupted despite repairs having been finished . Picking up a signal , they think they have the creature cornered in a cabinet . They prepare to catch it in a net , only to be startled by the discovery that it is the crew 's cat , , who had found a quiet place inside the cupboard , and runs away . Realizing they might pick up the cat on the tracker again later , sends off to catch . As is searching for , he finds a mysterious object resembling a shed reptile skin on the floor . He continues on to a hold housing one of the ship 's landing struts , eventually catching up with . Unknown to , a strange creature is hanging in the chains above him , seemingly observing him . As tries to coax out , the cat hisses when a huge shape drops down behind him . It is the creature , now a six - foot monster with four limbs , an elongated head , and rising to its full height behind the engineer . turns around , and is mesmerized while looking at the creature opening its mouth , revealing a second set of teeth which quickly extends from the mouth , biting in the head , and dragging him , bloodied and screaming , above into an airshaft . and hear him and arrive just in time to catch a glimpse of the monster as disappears and blood drips down . and can only confirm the creature is big and escaped through the air ducts . is assumed dead . The crew debates their next move . They all agree that the alien is using the air shafts to move around , so if they could drive it from the ducts into an airlock , they might be able to blow it out into space . asks if he can offer some helpful information as a scientist ; suggests the alien may be afraid of fire , as most animals are . Fortunately , there are several flamethrowers on board . Ripley volunteers to enter the air shafts , but overrules her by volunteering himself . enters the console once more . He tries to get the computer to evaluate their procedure to get rid of the alien , but simply can not provide an answer , due to lack of input . He tries to get to offer suggestions , but again , the computer can not compute , due to lack of available data . Finally , types " What are my chances ? " The computer replies that it can not compute . The main airlock is prepared by and for the decompression procedure , while and position themselves where they can measure movement inside the ducts . The main duct is opened and enters the network of air shafts with a flamethrower , allowing the crew to remote - close valves behind him as he proceeds . uses a motion tracker to get his location , when she suddenly catches another signal going towards him . Assuming it is the alien , uses the flamethrower to make sure that one of the ducts leading down is safe . He ascends a ladder to the lower duct , but the alien 's signal is lost in the meanwhile . Lambert instructs to hold position until she can reacquire the 's signal , which he does . Next to him , he finds a puddle of slime on the floor . Lambert assures him that the alien can not be far , so he uses the flame thrower around him to scare it out of hiding ; nothing is there . is disoriented in the cramped space and starts to panic , deciding to try again later . Suddenly picks up the 's signal again , moving at higher speed to his location . desperately urges him to move away . He descends another ladder and turns around , but finds himself facing the screaming creature , stretching its arms towards him . Static and feedback interrupt the line , and then there is only silence . puts ' flamethrower on the table , saying it was just laying in the duct : " no blood , no . " Lambert looks as if she is near a nervous breakdown , while is desperately trying to hide her apprehension . She suggests that in absence of a better idea , they should continue with ' plan . disagrees vehemently , and suggests abandoning the ship with the shuttle ; however , the shuttle can not sustain four people . also opposes the idea , and wants to kill the creature ; even if this means entering the entire duct system again , and blowing the alien out of the airlock . He leaves on 's orders to refill the flamethrower . once again tries to get helpful information from , but he says he is still analyzing . She scoffs at him for being so little help , and decides to go and try MOTHER for answers , since she now has access in light of ' absence . accesses the console , and queries for answers as to why they are unable to neutralize the alien . MOTHER responds that she can not clarify . asks MOTHER to explain why not . MOTHER replies that she can not , referring to 937 , which is only meant to be read by the science officer . uses an emergency command override to force to explain what 937 entails . MOTHER displays the following shocking text : " rerouted to new coordinates . lifeform . specimen . Priority one : insure return of organism for analysis . All other considerations secondary . Crew expendable . " As she contemplates the cold , hard words , she suddenly finds sitting next to her , saying there is an explanation for this . Furiously , she grabs and shouts at him , sobbing uncontrollably . She leaves the console , summoning and , but she finds that is closing all doors leaving the mess hall , preventing her from leaving . She demands that he open the doors , but simply stares at her . She notices a drop of white liquid running down his face , and he starts to have facial twitches . Unnerved , she tries to run away , but he suddenly grabs her hair ; breaks free , pulling out a lock of hair , and tries to run . quickly catches up and throws her against a few walls . While she is barely conscious , uses a rolled - up magazine in order to suffocate her . She starts to struggle fiercely as starts to twitch and make incoherent noises . Suddenly , and arrive , both trying to drag away from . howls in pain as grabs a piece of skin on his chest , forcing him to let go . quickly grabs a fire extinguisher and hits with it in the back . starts to convulse and shriek violently , making very inhuman sounds while spitting out white liquid . gives him another blow with the extinguisher , dislodging 's head , revealing is an android . He keeps pounding until he is on the floor , white liquid gushing from its insides . 's movements start to decrease and settles down , but suddenly , the decapitated body grabs him and forces him onto a table ; finally grabs the electric prod and screams as she stabs in the back with it , finally rendering the android lifeless . With disabled , theorizes that the sent him along to bring an alien back for their weapons division , as was always very protective of the creature . They reconnect his disembodied head to see if he can give them any advice on how to deal with the creature . confirms that his order was to bring back the lifeform , even if it meant sacrificing the crew . asks how they can kill the creature . He tells them simply , ' You ca n't ' , as it is " the perfect organism " . He has a silent admiration for it , " a survivor , unclouded by conscience , remorse and delusions of morality " . taunts their chances against the creature , infuriating and causing to disconnect him again . The three survivors decide to follow 's earlier suggestion ; set the to self - destruct and escape in the shuttle , leaving the to die on the main ship . As they leave the room , turns the flamethrower on 's corpse , incinerating his remains . will prepare the shuttle for launch , while and go to gather coolant for the shuttle 's life - support system . While prepping the shuttle , hears meowing on the ship 's open intercom system , and realizes the cat is still left behind . and are in the hold gathering equipment . They proceed to a small room where the coolant is stored , and start to pressurize the coolant bottles . ventures out alone , into the hallways of the to find the cat . Expecting the alien at every turn , finally locates the cat in the cockpit , where he startles her as he suddenly jumps into view . She puts him into his traveling container . In the storage room , and are so focused on the supplies , that neither of them sees a large shadow that has appeared inside the room . It is the , and it corners against a wall where she had been filling coolant bottles . can hear over the open intercom , shouting to to get out of the way , but the alien has cornered her against the wall . is unable to get a clear shot at it with the flamethrower without risking harm to , as it is hulking over her . Finally , he charges at the creature , but it rapidly spins , whipping the flamethrower out of his hands with its long tail , and grabbing him with its large claws . Parker fights against the creature 's grip while shouting a warning to to get out , but she is frozen with fright and does not move . The spreads its outer jaws to reveal the pistonlike inner throat and penetrating teeth , and as screams a warning the creature 's teeth penetrate 's skull , killing him . As rushes towards their position , she is powerless to prevent the creature from turning back to . It curls its tail around her , and the final thing that can hear from the intercom are the sounds of , crying , sobbing , gagging and screaming - followed by silence . finds their bloodied and lifeless bodies in the storage room , with no sign of the alien . In terrible shock , dashes towards the emergency room without stopping . Between the sobs , she locates the ship 's self - destruct mechanism and quickly completes the entire procedure to activate it . The voice of now announces that the self - destruct mechanism has been activated , and the ship will detonate in 10 minutes ; however , the self - destruct can still be canceled during the first five minutes . takes a ladder to the lower deck , where she hears a soft groan . She inspects the hold , and finds a strange organic structure adhering to the walls and machinery . Shocked , she finds stuck within the adhesive , barely alive . On the opposite wall , she notices a shape which vaguely resembles ; he seems to be dissolving , transforming into an object like the eggs seen in the derelict ship . very weakly begs to kill him . After some hesitation , she grants his dying request : she burns them both with the flamethrower and rushes out of the chamber . crawls up a ladder , and runs towards the shuttle with in the container . She briefly rests against a wall , when she suddenly hears the alien stirring around the corner . Terrified , she drops the cat container and carefully retraces her steps along the wall , as the alien slowly comes into view around the corner . It shows interest in . The alien slams the container against a wall . races back to the self - destruct mechanism and tries to override the procedure ; however , she is too late , as the mechanism is already starting to activate . She restarts the cooling unit , but MOTHER announces that it is too late to stop the countdown , and the will explode in five minutes , much to 's frustrated anger . With sirens blaring and steam releasing from the vents , runs back to the shuttle loading area , ready to make her best attempt to fight off the alien and get into the lifeboat . The alien is nowhere to be seen , only the cat container lying on its side . As fires start to erupt , she picks up and boards the shuttle with only one minute to abandon ship . She quickly runs through the launch sequence , and the shuttle lowers to launch position as starts counting down the last 30 seconds of the 's life . The shuttle 's engines ignite and the shuttle races away , leaving the in the distance . Three massive explosions follow as the 's engines detonate , destroying the ship , the refinery and ore it had been towing , and , apparently - also the . gives a hug and prepares one of the biobeds for hypersleep , putting in it . As she makes final preparations for the shuttle , a hand suddenly reaches out to her from a wall ; she shrieks , and in horror , she sees the alien lying in an alcove . In fact , it had stowed away aboard the shuttle , its external physicality making it blend in with the ship 's machinery . She flees into a locker with space suits inside , and notices the alien is not following her ; it remains lying in the alcove , seemingly unable to do something . Suddenly , gets an idea , and stealthily dons one of the space suits . Exiting the locker , she arms herself with a harpoon gun , then straps herself into a chair while singing " You Are My " to calm her nerves . Opening a series of air vents above the alien 's head , tests them one at a time , and then finds one that directly blasts high - pressure steam onto the alien , driving it shrieking from its hiding spot . As she is activating several buttons , she does not notice the monster creeping up to her from the side , until it is standing next to her to its full , menacing two - meter height , ready to attack with its inner jaw . Screaming , she opens the shuttle 's airlock door . Everything not secured , including the alien , blasts towards the door . However , the alien grabs the edges of the doorway to prevent itself from being sucked outside . quickly fires her harpoon before the creature is able to haul itself in ; it pierces the screaming alien , which lets go of the doorway and blasts outside , the wire connecting the gun to the harpoon pulling the gun out of 's hands . However , the door slams shut , jamming the wire under it . Still tethered to the door by the wire , the alien undauntedly attempts to re - enter the shuttle by climbing inside one of the heat thrusters . However , sees the opportunity and fires the engines , incinerating the alien , and sending it drifting into space , where the incredibly tough creature finally succumbs to differential pressure and blows apart . Before she and enter for the home , records a final log entry , stating that , , , , and are dead . Cargo and ship are destroyed . She expects to reach the frontier in six weeks , and to be picked up by the network . She signs off as , last survivor of the , and gets into hypersleep for the journey back to Earth.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The officials of a city unveil a new statue , only to find The sleeping on it . They shoo him away and he wanders the streets , destitute and homeless , and is soon tormented by two newsboys . He happens upon a beautiful ( ) , not realizing at first that she is blind , and buys a flower . Just when she is about to give him his change , a man gets into a nearby luxury car and is driven away , making her think that the has departed . The tiptoes away.\\nThat evening , the runs into a drunken ( ) who is attempting suicide on the waterfront . ( It is later mentioned that his wife has sent for her bags . ) The eventually convinces The he should live . He takes the Tramp back to his mansion and gives him a change of clothes . They go out for a night on the town , where the inadvertently causes much havoc . Early the next morning , they return to the mansion and encounter the en route to her vending spot . The asks The for some money , which he uses to buy all the girl 's flowers and then drives her home in the 's - . After he leaves , the tells her ( ) about her wealthy acquaintance . When the returns to the mansion , the has sobered and does not remember him , so has the butler order him out . Later that day , the meets the again while intoxicated , and invites him home for a lavish party . The next morning , having sobered again and planning to leave for a cruise , the again has the tossed out . Returning to the 's apartment , the spies her being attended by a doctor . Deciding to take a job to earn money for her , he becomes a street sweeper . Meanwhile , the receives a notice that she and the girl will be evicted if they can not pay their back rent by the next day , but hides it . The visits the girl on his lunch break , and sees a newspaper story about a Viennese doctor who has devised an operation that cures blindness . He then finds the eviction notice and reads it aloud at the girl 's request . He reassures her that he will pay the rent . But he returns to work late and is fired . As he is walking away , a boxer persuades him to stage a fake fight , promising to split the $ 50 prize money . Just before the bout , however , the man receives a telegram warning him that the police are after him . He flees , leaving the a no - nonsense replacement opponent . Despite a valiant effort , the is knocked out . Some time later , he meets the drunken who has just returned from . The takes him to the mansion and after he hears the girl 's plight , gives the $ 1,000 . Unbeknownst to the and the , two burglars were hiding in the house when they entered . Upon hearing about the cash , they knock out the millionaire and take the rest of his money . The telephones for the police , but the robbers flee before they arrive , and the butler assumes he stole the money . The can not remember the or giving him the $ 1,000 . The narrowly escapes and gives the money to the girl saying he will be going away for a while . Later , he is arrested in front of the newsboys who taunted him earlier , and jailed . Months later , the is released . Searching for the girl , he returns to her customary street corner but does not find her . With her sight restored , the girl has opened up a flourishing flower shop with her . When a rich customer comes into the shop , the girl briefly wonders if he is her mysterious benefactor . But when he leaves with no acknowledgement , she realizes again she is wrong . While retrieving a flower from the gutter outside the shop , the is again tormented by the two newsboys . As he turns to leave , he finds himself staring at the girl through the window . His despair turns to elation and he forgets about the flower . Seeing that he has crushed the flower he retrieved , the girl kindly offers him a fresh one and a coin . The begins to leave , then reaches for the flower . When the girl takes hold of his hand to place the coin in it , she recognizes the touch of his hand and realizes he is no stranger . " You ? " she says , and he nods , asking , " You can see now ? " She replies , sobbing , " Yes , I can see now . " The smiles shyly at the girl as the film ends.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The story opens in , late in 1969 . and special operations veteran ( ) , has returned to on another combat tour during the , casually admitting that he is unable to rejoin society in the and that his marriage has broken up . He drinks heavily , chain - smokes and hallucinates alone in his room , becoming very upset and injuring himself when he breaks a large mirror . One day two military policemen arrive at 's apartment and after cleaning him up , escort him to an officers trailer where military intelligence officers ( ) and ( ) approach him with a top - secret assignment to follow the into the remote jungle , find rogue ( ) and " terminate his command with extreme prejudice " . apparently went insane and now commands his own troops inside neutral . They play a recording of ' voice , captured by intelligence where rambles about the destruction of the war and a snail crawling on the edge of a straight razor . is flown by helicopter to and joins a commanded by " Chief " ( ) and crewmen ( ) , " " ( ) and " " ( ) . Williard narrates that the crew are mostly young soldiers ; is only 17 and from the , is a famous surfer from and is a chef from . The is an experienced sailor who mentions that he 'd previously brought another special operations soldier into the jungles of on a similar mission and heard that the man committed suicide . As they travel down the coast to the mouth of the , 's voice - over reveals that hearing ' voice triggered a fascination with himself . They rendezvous with reckless ( ) , a commander of an attack helicopter squadron , the infamous 1st of the 9th ( ) , who initially scoffs at them . Kilgore befriends , both being keen surfers , and agrees to escort them through the - filled coastal mouth of the due to the surfing conditions there . The next morning , launches a brutal helicopter assault on the village amid air and napalm strikes on the locals and ' of the ' playing over the helicopter loudspeakers , the beach is taken and orders others to surf it amid enemy artillery fire . While nostalgically regales about a previous strike , gathers his men to the , transported via helicopter , and begins the journey upriver . During the long journey that occupies the bulk of the story , sifts further through the dossier , learning that he was a model officer and possible future general . Back in 1964 after returning from a tour of duty in , the 38 - year - old had eschewed the promotion , applying several times for Airborne training and had sent a report to his superiors about the war that was deemed classified . In other voice - over narration by , returned to in 1966 as a member of the for another combat tour , which his fighting methods won victories against the enemy and , but also drew criticism from his superior officers . By the late summer of 1968 , ' combat patrols were coming under frequent ambush which ended in 1968 after ordered his men to summary execute four high ranking Vietnamese officials who he suspected were double agents for the . Despite the fact that the four executed were indeed revealed double agents , the charged with murder for taking matters into his own hands instead of going through proper channels which resulted in and his / South Vietnamese army fleeing into . One evening , accompanies into the jungle to pick mangoes when they encounter a tiger . But they both make it back to the boat safely and continue on . sees the tiger encounter and 's near - hysterical panic as a stern reminder of the rule to never leave the boat . Another evening or two later , the crew visit a supply depot show featuring which goes awry when the servicemen attempt to assault the which the to a quick end . Some time later , the crew inspect a civilian sampan for weapons , but the strung - out panics and opens fire , prompting to open fire on the innocent Vietnamese family as well . Amid the supplies on the boat , finds a puppy . Lance harshly takes it from and keeps it as a pet . When finds one young woman alive , coldly shoots her to prevent any further delay of his mission . Tension arises between and from this moment on as believes himself to be in command of the , while prioritizes other objectives over 's secret mission . Another night later , the crew reaches the chaos of the bridge under attack . learns from a courier that the missing commanding officer , ( ) , was sent on an earlier mission to kill . also sees the lost side of the war : burned - out , stoned soldiers fighting a battle they are losing to keep the bridge open . As the crew leave , the bridge is once again destroyed by enemy shellfire . and are continually under the influence of drugs . Lance in particular smears his face with camouflage paint and becomes withdrawn . The next day the boat is fired upon by an unseen enemy in the trees , killing and making even more hostile toward . Another day or two later , the is ambushed again , this time by warriors as they cross the border into , they return fire despite 's objections that the arrows fired on them are n't lethal . is impaled with a spear and tries to kill by trying to pull him onto the spearhead before dying . Afterward , confides in the two surviving crew members , and , about the mission and they reluctantly agree to continue upriver , where they find the banks littered with mutilated bodies . Arriving at 's outpost at last , takes with him to the village , leaving behind with orders to call an airstrike on the village if they do not return . In the camp , the soldiers are met by an American freelance photographer ( ) , who manically praises 's genius . As they proceed , and see corpses and severed heads scattered about the temple that serves as 's living quarters and encounter , who seems catatonic . is bound and brought before in the darkened temple , where derides him as an " errand boy " . Meanwhile , prepares to call in the airstrike but is kidnapped . Later imprisoned , screams helplessly as drops 's severed head into his lap . After some time , is released and given the freedom of the compound . In another monologue sequence , the shadowy lectures him on his theories of war , humanity and civilization while praising the ruthlessness and dedication of the : had reached his breaking point some years before when he 'd led a mission to inoculate the children of a small village for polio . Soon after completing that mission , ' unit was called back by one of the villagers where he found that the had come and hacked off every child 's arm that had been injected with the vaccine . morbidly admires the vicious dedication of the and the will they had to foil the efforts of his unit to help the villagers . believed that if he 'd had a large legion of men who would go to such extremes that he could end the war itself . Near the end of their time together , discusses his son and asks that tell his son everything about him in the event of his death . That night , as the villagers ceremonially slaughter a water buffalo , enters 's chamber as is making a tape recording , and attacks him with a machete . Lying mortally wounded on the ground , whispers his final words " The horror ... the horror ... " before dying . discovers substantial typed work of 's writings ( scrawled with " Drop the bomb Exterminate them all ! " ) and takes it with him before exiting . descends the stairs from 's chamber and drops his weapon . The villagers do likewise and allow to take the near catatonic by the hand and lead him to the boat . The two of them ride away in the downstream to find help and safety as the tries to reach them on the short - wave radio . turns off the radio . As drives the boat away into the dark of the night jungle and in the pouring rain , the last words of 's " the horror ... the horror ... " echo in his mind.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > This is a complex story about ( ) , a man whose ability to make new memories is damaged when he is struck in the head while confronting two people who are attacking his wife ( ) at their home in the middle of the night . He kills one of the attackers during the attack and one of the last things remembers is his wife dying . He devotes his life to finding and killing the second attacker . The movie alternates between color and black and white sequences . The black and white sequences proceed in chronological order , while the color sequences proceed in reverse chronological order . The forward black and white scenes and the reverse color scenes alternate until they meet in the middle of the story at the end of the film . In the two disc DVD set , the second disc contains the movie in chronological order . To play this version of the movie : ( 1 ) select the clock icon ; ( 2 ) select the answer " C " to every multiple choice question ; and ( 3 ) arrange the tire changing steps in reverse chronological order ( 3 - 4 - 1 - 2 ) . The movie begins to play with the credits first -- in backward order . Some functions ( fast forward , chapter skip , etc . ) are disabled . This synopsis describes the scenes in chronological order . It is not the plot order presented in the film . The story starts in black and white . wakes up in a room at the puzzled as to why he is there . The phone rings and he speaks with an unknown caller . He tells the caller that he suffers from , a condition which makes him unable to create new memories . He describes the condition by detailing the story of ( ) , who had the same problem . describes how one must have a system of notes to deal with the problems and a drive to use them . says he has the drive that never had and the viewer sees 's tattoo : " AND MURDERED WIFE " as well as other clues and notes tattooed on his body . continues the story and explains that he had just become an insurance investigator when he met and was assigned to determine whether his condition was covered by his insurance policy . 's condition was not like other cases of anterograde in that was unable to learn through conditioning . After additional testing , says he concluded that 's condition was psychological and the claim was denied because was not covered for mental illness . explains how ( ) met privately with him . In trying to placate her , told her that should be able to make new memories . She tested 's memory by repeatedly asking him to give her insulin injections . She lapsed into a coma and never recovered from the overdose . was then confined to a mental institution . During this conversation , the caller and talk about 's quest and how the police did not believe the story about the second attacker . The caller identifies himself as a policeman and provides with additional clues for his quest . tattoos the fact the second attacker was a drug dealer . The caller identifies the second attacker as and tells that he has set up a meeting with . agrees to meet the caller in the motel lobby . In the lobby , meets a man ( ) and asks him if he is . The man insists that should call him since he is undercover . gives directions to the meeting location and goes to meet at an abandoned building outside of town . When ( ) arrives , he recognizes as the man with the memory condition , demands to know what is doing there , and asks where is . threatens with a tire iron and tells him to strip . pleads for his life and tells that there is $ 200,000 in the trunk of his car for payment of the drugs that was to have brought to the meeting . strangles , takes a photo of his body , and starts putting on 's clothes . As the photo of 's body develops , the film gradually goes from black and white into color . The remaining story is in color , but proceeds in the film in reverse order . As drags into the basement , he hears whisper " ... " before dying . concludes that if knew about , he was not the second attacker . arrives at the scene and tries to convince that was the man he was after . does not believe him . finally admits that was a drug dealer who did not have anything to do with his wife 's killing . then tells that his wife survived the attack . According to , was a fraud who was not even married and it was 's wife who was diabetic . claims to be the police officer who investigated his wife 's murder . He says he believed him about the second attacker and helped him track down and kill the real more than a year ago . claims that he took a picture of a happy right after the second attacker was dead . forgot the killing and began searching for the dead all over again . tells there are plenty of to find and admits that he is even a : his full name is and his mother calls him . Before can forget 's revelations , he decides to continue the hunt , lying to himself to set himself up to kill . He puts a note on 's photo saying " Do n't believe his lies , " records 's license plate number as 's , and leaves himself a reminder to get a tattoo of the plate number , SG137IU . ditches by throwing 's car keys into some weeds . then leaves his pickup truck at the refinery and drives away in 's , still wearing 's clothes . After forgetting 's revelations and the lies to himself , finds a tattoo parlor and has the license plate number tatooed onto his leg . sees the parked outside and comes in , trying to move the car and get to get out of town in some new clothes . sees the note on the back of 's pictures and decides to leave without him . finds a note in the pocket of 's suit coat , which he is wearing . The note is from a telling to come to 's bar . Not realizing he is wearing 's clothes and driving 's car , thinks the note is for him and goes to meet ( - ) . He tells her about his condition . believes his story after a test . takes to her home and tells him he can stay with her . recounts what he remembers of the attack . He says he awoke to sounds , got a gun , and found his wife being strangled . shot one intruder , but a second man clubbed him with a sap and smashed his head into a mirror . He goes on to explain that the cops did not believe there was a second attacker . tells that the second attacker was too smart and left the evidence to look like there was only one intruder . tricks into going after a man named ( ) , who she claims has been harassing her for the money from 's prior drug deals . leaves to look for . is waiting for him as he leaves 's home . tries to warn about , but after seeing the " Do n't believe his lies " note on 's picture , does not believe him . does decide he should n't stay with and follows 's advice to go to the . goes to the . Though has already paid for a room , ( ) at the front desk takes advantage of his condition by renting him a second room . calls an escort service . When the escort arrives , explains to her that he wants only to relive going to sleep the night of the attack . After falling asleep , the escort wakes him . He asks the escort to leave . He then takes personal items belonging to his wife to a reservoir and burns them . In the morning , leaves the reservoir and is spotted by . escapes and goes to 's motel to wait for him . When returns to his motel room , beats him and ties him up . calls for help in dealing with . comes to 's motel room . and convince to leave town . Returning the favor of getting rid of , spends the night at 's . In the morning she agrees to trace the license plate number tatooed on 's leg . Later that day , gives him the information along with directions to " an abandoned place outside of town " where a guy she knew " used to do bigger deals " . takes it back to his motel . At the motel , puts the clues together and concludes that is and must be the second attacker . He calls and they go to the same abandoned building where was killed a few days earlier . shoots in the > 

 < synopsis > In 1858 , ( ) , a slave , is chained to a bunch of other slaves and being marched to his new owner 's estate in by the brothers . At nightfall , a German man in a dentist cart pulls up and hails the brothers . He introduces himself as ( is clearly more intelligent and enlightened than the . He says he is looking for a slave who can identify a band of wanted fugitives known as the brothers . announces that he knows the brothers and can identify them . Schultz offers to buy , but his polite and educated manner rubs the ill - mannered the wrong way , and threatens to shoot him with his shotgun . In response , lowers his lantern , whips out a revolver , and shoots , then 's horse , spilling its owner on the ground . The horse carcass then lands on and crushes 's leg , leaving him screaming in pain . Despite 's continued insults and condemnation , pays the man ( for both , and the 's horse ) , gets an official title to . Free , approaches 's corpse , intending to take the man 's clothes and boots . When berates , steps heavily on the dead horse , prompting to scream further . takes 's boots and clothes and mounts 's horse . Before and leave , he frees the remaining slaves ( clearly , finds slavery abhorrent ) and says that they may either carry the remaining brother back to town , or shoot him and flee . As and ride off , we hear pleading for his life . We hear a gunshot and can see blood splatter as 's brains are blown out . and arrive in the small town of near . As they travel through the streets , stop to stare in disbelief at the sight of a black man on a horse , much to 's confusion . As ties his cart down at a hitching post , he checks some papers to make sure he 's in the right place . The two then walk into a saloon despite the fact that is forbidden from doing so . When insists on being served , the barkeep runs out of the saloon , calling after him to specifically bring the sheriff , not the town marshal . While they wait , pours beers for himself and and leaves money on the bar . He explains that he is no longer a dentist , but a bounty hunter in search of the brothers who are wanted dead or alive . He admits that although he knows the general location of the brothers , near , they have adopted aliases , and he needs somebody who can identify them . tells that if he helps him bring in the brothers , will give him his freedom , pay him a $ 75 share of the reward , and let him keep his horse . immediately agrees , when , as if on cue , sees the sheriff coming down the sidewalk . The sheriff enters the saloon , shotgun in hand , and tells and to leave . The two comply , and exit out the swinging doors . We see that a number of are watching the spectacle unfolding as the sheriff asks them why they are coming into his town and showing themselves with the sole purpose of causing trouble . is silent , then steps forward . A spring - mounted pops up in his right hand , and he shoots the sheriff in the stomach . The townspeople are stunned as the sheriff stumbles to the ground , moaning in pain . Schultz walks around the wounded sheriff , aims his , and shoots him in the head , killing him . The townspeople immediately run for their lives . Schultz looks up and tells the bartender that now is the time to fetch the marshal . The bartender runs off while and go back into the saloon to wait . The town marshal and most of the town arrive and train rifles on the front door of the saloon . Schultz hears that he has 100 rifles aimed at his head , and gets the marshal to agree to not have him shot dead like a dog in the street when he comes out . Schultz then exits , hands raised over his head , and a paper in his hand . He announces to the marshal and to the assembled townsfolk what has really happened : that the dead man the people of elected their sheriff , who went by the name of ' ' , is a wanted cattle rustler named , with a $ 200 bounty on his head . says that the paper in his hand is an official document from a judge that charges with finding and bringing back to the proper jurisdiction dead or alive . Schultz then suggests that the marshal pay him the $ 200 fee . Later , while camping , admits to that what he wants to do once he is liberated is buy freedom for his wife , a slave girl named ( ) who had been a servant of a German mistress before being sold into slavery in the Their owner ( ) was a cruel old man who disapproved of their marriage , so the pair attempted escape . They were caught by the brothers , who tortured and branded them both with the mark of a runaway , a small " R " on their right cheeks . then directed the brothers to sell the pair to separate owners , and to take the lowest price for . and eventually develop a plan to infiltrate an estate near where they suspect that the brothers reside and for to identify them . is to play - act as a freed slave who has been hired as 's valet . They arrive at the plantation owned by " Daddy " ( ) . Schultz states he is looking to buy one of 's slave girls for an exorbitant price . As he and talk business , is given free range to look around the estate . asks , his escort , if she knows of the . admits that she does n't know them , leading to suspect that the are using a false name . At this , reveals that three overseer brothers known as the did arrive in the past year . She points out the first one in the field . looks through his telescope and sees that it is . Seeing causes to have a lengthy flashback over running away with and pleading with to spare from the whip , unsuccessfully . The flashback ends with saying , " I like the way you beg , boy . "Snapping out of his flashback , learns that and are on a different part of the plantation , about to whip a young slave girl for breaking eggs . The two have tied her to a tree by the arms and is about to use the whip on her when appears and shouts 's name . turns , stunned to see , who suddenly produces a similar to 's and shoots him through a page glued to his shirt . He looks down at his bullet wound , stunned , as tells him , " I like the way you die , boy , " and pitches forward , dead . Little attempts to grab his revolver , but grabs 's whip and uses it to viciously flog him . He then takes the gun and unloads it into , just as comes racing in . tells that is already galloping away across the cotton field . Schultz tracks through his sniper rifle , and once positively identifies the man , Schultz fires . Blood sprays the cotton flowers as falls off his horse . Though is incensed when he arrives , he is forced to let them go once explains they are legally authorized to kill and collect these men . Schultz and pack up quickly and leave . That night , out for revenge , calls out all the fellow white men of the plantation to kill and , spotting their dentist 's cart camped outside of town . The men make their charge over the hill in style hoods , and surround the small campsite . The scene then changes to earlier , when is giving instructions to the other to not shoot or unless they are shot at . He puts his bag hood on , and a funny scene ensues as finds he is unable to see through the eye holes in his mask . Everyone else starts to bicker about how badly made their masks are , which ends with , whose wife spent all afternoon making masks for them , giving up and riding away , furious . Eventually , the get their act together . As they surround the cart , one of the men spots what he thinks is and hiding under the cart . He peeks under , only to find that the ' bodies ' are actually bedrolls . wonders where the two bounty hunters actually are . In response , the scene cuts to and hiding in a tree a short distance away , carrying a rifle . says , " , " and fires at the cart , setting off a bundle of dynamite hidden in the tooth on the roof of his cart . It blows up and kills most of the . manages to survive the detonation and begins riding away . sees this and hands the rifle over to , letting him do the honors . tracks , and then fires , hitting and shooting him off his horse . Schultz realizes that is a natural and formidable sharpshooter . asks what will do now that he is officially free , and says he will locate his wife ( believed to be in ) and try to purchase her freedom . , who has bonded with and is impressed by both his intelligence and marksmanship , proposes to help rescue his wife if will work with him over the winter in collecting bounties . King is also impressed with 's name ( and her ability to speak ) , telling the German legend of and . In the legend , the beautiful is captured and imprisoned in a tower on a mountainside that is guarded by a dragon and surrounded by hell - fire . Her , Siegfried , rescues her , facing the mountain and dragon simply because he is brave , but also overcoming the hell - fire out of his love for . is quite taken with the tale . agrees to 's proposal , finding him to be a deeply honorable man in spite of his line of work . King trains to not only be an expert with a gun , but also how to read and present himself in public . On one mission , and perch themselves on a hill overlooking a small farm where hesitates to kill a man who is now peacefully working on the farm and has a son . explains that before the man owned this farm and started a family , he murdered several people while robbing stagecoaches , and that he has a $ 7,000 bounty on his head . explains that it is this own man 's actions in a dirty world that has brought the bounty hunters to his door . Hearing this , shoots and kills the man in front of his son . tells him to keep the wanted poster , as a bounty hunter 's first successful poster is good luck . Throughout the winter , imagines he and free and happy . Jumping forward to 1859 , once winter passes , the two head back to the in search of . discovers that she was sold to a man named ( ) , the owner of a plantation known as ' ' . is famous for breeding " mandingos"--slaves who are bred to fight each other to the death ( bare - knuckle ) for their owner 's amusement ( and for betting purposes ) . says that he will pose as a wealthy who seeks to purchase one of 's mandingos to take to fight in , and that is his business partner and talent evaluator . That evening , and arrive at a 's and they meet 's lawyer , ( ) , who explains that is obsessed with French culture ( although , unlike the actually cultured , does not speak ) . The two are brought upstairs where they watch a mandingo fight , which is very brutal and fatal for the loser , who gets his eyes gouged out by the winner and his head caved in with a ball peen hammer . As congratulates his winning mandingo , the owner of the dead mandingo , an Italian businessman named ( , the star of the original ' ' in a surprise cameo ) frets over the loss of his fighter and retires to the nearby bar for a drink . introduces himself to before he walks out ( a clear homage and wink - to - the - audience of the two actors in the same scene in the only time in this movie ) . It turns out that is boorish and clearly arrogant and ignorant despite his wealth and high upbringing . is incredibly offensive to and his guests , talking back to all the white men . finds 's rude and defensive behavior amusing and to be charming . and state that they are willing to pay an exorbitant amount ( $ 12,000 ) for one of 's better mandingos and they arrange to return with him to his estate . The next morning , the group travels in a convoy to the ranch . continues to act defiantly , insulting both slave and white man alike , and displays his intelligence . When asks why he is so belligerent , says he is playing his role in this dirty world . states that he believes one in 10,000 black men are exceptional , and believes to be one of those rare few . At one point on the travel into , they see one of 's slaves chased up a tree by some of 's white trash work - men and their vicious hounds . It turns out the slave , ( named by after the hero from The , a book written by , whom admires ) , is a mandingo who was caught running away . Candie convinces to come down from the tree where pleads he ca n't handle any other fights despite having won three in a row . states that his slaves ca n't retire from fighting until they have won at least five matches in order for him to recoup his $ 500 investment in them , and that must be killed . Schultz suddenly offers to pay $ 500 to spare 's life , but , realizing such odd behavior would blow their cover , loudly declares that is n't worth a single penny . Schultz , coming to his senses , agrees not to pay for , and has the slave ripped to pieces by the hounds as they all look on . glares at , but imagines himself reunited with to keep his anger suppressed . A little later , they all arrive at and meet 's widowed older sister ( ) and his loyal , 76 - year - old house - slave and foreman trustee ( ) . It is clear that is appalled that is free and riding on a horse into the estate along with his master and other white men and will be allowed to stay in 's house . also takes an instant disliking to . informs that , while he was gone , also attempted to escape and is now locked in the , a metal pit in 's field . says he wants to meet , saying he heard legend of her German - speaking abilities . , wanting to please his guest , orders to be cleaned up and sent to 's room . Though he 's enraged at seeing his wife dragged from the hotbox , checks his temper . When is brought to ' room , the doctor explains to ( in ) that he and his " friend " are here to rescue her . He then signals to come into his room , and faints with happiness upon seeing her husband . Schultz , impressed with 's intelligence , begins the next phase of his plan . That evening at dinner , serves and his many guests - including and . notes that seems to be attracted to . This piques 's curiosity ( we see that is clearly invested in 's success , and forces the other slaves to call him " , " or " " as though he were their master ) and he begins to interrogate in a back room . denies knowing , but knows that she is lying because she bears the same small ' r ' brand ( for " runaway " ) on the right side of her face as does . Meanwhile , , despite 's " objections , " offers to buy 's third - best mandingo for $ 12,000 . They agree that will return to the estate in five days with a lawyer to complete the transaction . , clearly thrilled at this windfall , is then asked by whether he can also purchase and take immediate possession of her ( claims he is interested in her ability to speak German , though is convinced is simply sexually attracted to her).Before can accept the deal , interrupts and asks to speak to his master in another room . Once there , ( who is drinking brandy ) tells that he is convinced that and know each other and that and intend to buy her , leave the property , and never return for the mandingo . is incensed and returns to the dining room with a small bag containing the skull of an old slave of his plantation , . He then explains that he collects the skulls of his dead slaves and , invoking the pseudoscience of phrenology , has determined that the reason they do n't rise up and kill their masters , despite easily outnumbering the whites , is that their brains are predisposed to subservience and civility whereas white brains are built for dominance and ingenuity . suddenly drops his act , revealing he knows that they want , and unless they immediately pay him $ 12,000 for her , he will kill her with a ball peen hammer and examine her skull in front of them . immediately agrees to these terms , and tells that he is not exceptional after all . Schultz pays the $ 12,000 and has his lawyer , , begin drawing up the papers transferring ownership of to . gloats about his victory and intelligence , and begins to think of 's brutal death . The papers are signed , but before they leave , insults 's intelligence , noting how especially stupid is , since he names his slaves after characters in novels written by even though was a black man . , seeking to humiliate and recognizing that finds him to be a disgusting human being , says he will not allow the travelers to leave with unless shakes his hand , a & tradition . This is more than can take . As he stretches out his hand to shake 's hand , his spring - loaded pistol pops into his right hand and fires through the flower on 's lapel . looks down at the bullet wound , clutches his chest , staggers backwards and falls over , dead . screams , " No ! " and rushes to 's side . , 's bodyguard , turns around . Schultz apologizes to for being unable to resist temptation , and then fires his shotgun . The shot hits with enough force to throw him back into a bookcase , dead . Just as 's body hits the ground , runs toward 's body . All hell breaks loose as grabs the distracted 's revolver and shoots him . tries to run , screaming for help , but is shot multiple times as he tries to enter the foyer . then is thrown back into the foyer , and a shootout ensues as he trades fire with numerous white ranchers . Blood flies everywhere and bodies fall left , right and center . Despite taking several losses , several reinforcements of white ranchers arrive , armed with repeating rifles , where they use ladders to scale the second floor of the house to gain access and take position atop the second floor balcony where they open massive return fire against the lone who is forced to take cover under some furniture . The shootout ends when runs out of ammo while and capture and threaten to kill her unless agrees to 's terms of surrender . Feeling that he has no other choice , acquiesces and is brutally beaten by 's crew . When awakens several hours later the next morning , he is naked and tied upside down in a shack . is preparing to castrate him with a red hot knife . enters and tells the man that the plans have changed , and is no longer slated for castration . After the man leaves , explains that would have died too quickly if he had been castrated . , wanting to suffer , has arranged to sell him to the as a slave , where will spend the rest of his days . En route to the mining company , is able to get the attention of one of the transporters ( a group of , including a cameo by director ) . He tells them that he is a bounty hunter , not a slave , and that he was tracking a man worth $ 7,000 before he was captured . He promises that if they free and arm him , he will give them the lion 's share of the reward . They find the bounty notice ( from 's first kill ) on his person and also question the other slaves , who admit that is a bounty hunter and rode in to with a white man on a horse . The transporters unwisely free , give him a pistol and he immediately kills them all and frees the other slaves bound for the mine . He takes a horse , guns , and dynamite and heads back to . first stops and massacres the all of the surviving ranch hands ( trackers ) who had hunted down the escaped with their hounds , killing them all in 's name ( the masked female tracker is played by , and another tracker is played by ) . He then finds 's dead body in a stable with the freedom papers for still on him . After he takes the papers , swears that his next act of vengeance will be in honor of . sneaks back onto the estate and finds and frees . He has her wait outside while he engages in further preparations . That evening , 's family and friends return from 's funeral , is there waiting at the top of the grand staircase and shoots and the last two white ranch hands dead . even shoots , sending her sprawling backwards and out of sight .... despite that she is unarmed . Note : One can conclude that because suggested ( with the help of ) that be sent to the , so eliminated her . After telling the two female house slaves to leave , then shoots in both of his kneecaps , stating that , in the 9,999 slaves has likely betrayed while working for , he has never met one like . Wounded and laying on the floor , defiantly cries out that will be hunted down and killed by bounty hunters for his crimes , and that the and slavery will never die . Without saying a word , lights a fuse , and walks out on . The explosion utterly destroys 's mansion as still threatens . meets his wife , who waits for him with two horses outside the estate . The two are finally reunited , and ride off into the night to face whatever destiny awaits them . is destined to become a legend , just as Siegfried before him did . After the end credits , we cut to the slaves freed from the mining company transporters . They remain seated where left them , still in awe of what they witnessed . Then , one asks what the name of that black man was ( suggesting may not yet become a legend).</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > In the spring of 1936 an exploration party penetrates thick jungle on the South American continent . When the group 's leader stops to examine map fragments , another of the group pulls a gun . The leader , hearing the click as the turncoat cocks the pistol 's hammer , pulls out a bullwhip and disarms the man , sending him fleeing back through the jungle . The man who expertly wields the bullwhip is " " , ( ) , an archaeologist with a reputation for heavy - handed field work that takes him around the globe in search of ancient treasures . and his remaining companion , ( ) , enter a dank and oppressively vast cave , where a competitor of his , , disappeared . Inside the cave are several traps rigged by the ancient people who hid a small , valuable statue there -- one of the traps is found to have impaled . finds the antechamber where the statue sits atop a pedestal and is protected by an elaborate system of pressure - sensitive stones that release deadly darts from the surrounding walls . avoids the booby - trapped stones and makes it to the idol . He very deftly replaces the idol with a bag of sand , judging the weight of the treasure by sight . However , the weight is not precise , the pedestal sinks and the chamber begins to collapse . runs , narrowly avoiding the darts . When he arrives at a bottomless pit he & had crossed earlier using ' bullwhip , crosses safely but refuses to give his whip unless he gives him the idol . throws him the idol but drops the whip and runs off . manages to jump across and pull himself up and escape under the stone door that closes . He finds dead , killed by the same trap that killed . retrieves the idol and must once again flee while a large boulder rushes toward him . He leaps out of the cave 's entrance just as the boulder hits , sealing it . Seemingly safe , is cornered by the , the local tribe , who are led by ( ) , an arrogant French archaeologist who is a longtime rival and enemy of 's . Indy hands his pistol and the idol . When raises the idol and the bow , flees and is rescued by ( ) , flying a seaplane , though , an admitted ophidiophobe , is n't pleased to find 's pet snake in the cockpit with him . Back stateside , teaches an archaeology class and is still upset over the loss of the statue , which he surmises is taking to to sell on the black market . has found pieces he feels will pay for a trip to to find , but 's friend ( ) dashes that hope by informing him that two officers want to talk to him about , his former teacher , who was his friend until broke up with his daughter , ( officers are concerned because they 've intercepted a German cable concerning a mammoth archaeological dig in the Egyptian desert not far from . When they read the cable , and realize the have discovered , an ancient city long since buried in a gigantic sandstorm in 980 and the possible burial site of the of the . The was built by ancient to hold the stone tablets on which inscribed the . quickly explains to them the need for an object mentioned in the communique , the headpiece to the of , which will reveal the location of the at the excavation . The men are impressed by 's and ' knowledge of the but tells them the man most qualified is , who has been living somewhere in for several years . When shows the agents a picture of the , it depicts it using unimaginable destructive power . also says very gravely that any army that carries the into battle is invincible . Indy flies to ( followed by a agent , ( ) ) to speak to , who runs a restaurant and bar ( and who can outdrink anyone ) because he needs the headpiece to the of . , still bitter over their breakup , nonetheless accepts when offers her $ 3,000 and the promise of more when they return stateside . She is cryptic about the headpiece , and after leaves she reveals that she 'd been wearing the headpiece on a chain around her neck . She looks it over thoughtfully and places it on a small wooden sculpture on the table . Toht and several heavies enter the bar and hold hostage , with ready to torture her for the headpiece . Indy returns and a firefight erupts during which the fireplace is dislodged and the building begins burning down . finds the headpiece but when he grabs it he 's badly burned -- leaving an image of one side of the headpiece branded on his hand . He jumps out a window , trying to cool his hand in the snow . Outside the burning tavern , tells that she 's his partner in the venture until he can pay her . The two fly to to see 's pal , ( - ) , one of the country 's most successful excavators , who is working on the site and who reveals that the are aided by a French archaeologist ( ) . Though the dig has uncovered much of , knows that they 'll never find the 's location without the headpiece . says he knows a man who can read the ancient inscriptions that give the precise measurements of the staff . Later , while shopping at a bazaar , and are attacked by sword - wielding working for agents . fights them off but in the confusion Marion is trapped in a large basket and taken by two of the terrorists . The effort to track her down is held up by a man brandishing a sword in intimidating fashion . The swordsman is casually shot down in short order by a thoroughly unimpressed . Soon spots a basket carried to a truck filled with explosives and is fired on by a submachine - gun - wielding assailant . His commander orders the to take off , but shoots them and the truck crashes , exploding and destroying the basket . Disconsolate over losing , drowns his sorrows in alcohol at a nearby tavern but is met by more agents who escort him to a table where he finds , who gleefully talks about finding the , no longer caring whether he lives or dies , reaches for his sidearm as inside pull rifles -- only to see 's large brood of children rush in , surround and escort him out . takes to see the shaman who is reading the headpiece 's inscriptions after both men have learned that and his aide , ( ) , have obtained a copy of the headpiece . ( Neither man is aware that it is a duplicate traced from 's burned hand . ) The shaman reveals two critical facts : first , that the headpiece gives the precise height of the of , and second , that the staff the used was too long because the other side of the headpiece instructs to subtract from the height that was stated on the front side -- so their excavation is over a mile away from the 's actual burial site , which is known as the of . Infiltrating the mammoth site , is lowered into an underground map room containing a precisely detailed miniature of the city . Using the headpiece , he identifies the precise location of the of . Sneaking further around the gigantic camp , is shocked to find , alive but bound and gagged . starts to free her , but when she reveals that the keep asking about him and what he knows , he realizes he ca n't cut her loose without revealing his presence to the . Late that afternoon and sneak a digging party of their own to the actual location of the of . Late into the night they finally reveal the roof of the chamber , and to 's horror it is filled with dangerous snakes . clears an area of snakes with burning torches , then lowers himself into the chamber and burns many of the snakes alive with flaming gasoline . follows and the two eventually find the gigantic stone chest containing the They remove it and place it into a crate . Just after hoists himself out , the rope is dropped into the hole and appears with . brags about again stealing 's find and how he 'll seal him in the chamber to die . Before the roof is closed up , throws into the chamber , over 's protests . While and fight off the snakes , notices a wall with holes that snakes are crawling through . He climbs a mammoth statue and with all his might breaks it from its foundation and it crashes through the wall . The two find an opening to the surface , and discover the airfield at the excavation camp , where a Nazi flying wing is waiting to fly the out . The two sneak up to the plane , but is attacked by a mechanic and a prolonged fight ensues that is joined by a burly German soldier who pummels before being punched backward and shredded to bits by the plane 's propeller . Marion seizes one of the plane 's machine guns and opens fire on soldiers , in the process setting a fuel dump . The fire destroys the area and the plane explodes , but and escape . Dietrich orders his men to transport the by truck to . When finds and , he is overjoyed they 're alive and tells them of 's plan . takes a horse and pursues the convoy , seizing the truck containing the and surviving a brutal chase and fight with soldiers to drive the to safety . In the melee , Indy forces and 's car off the road , delaying their pursuit . He and board a tramp steamer that will take them to a safer location , but a submarine captures the ship . The ship 's captain tells and to take the and leave behind for their own amusement , takes aboard the sub with the anyway . suddenly appears as the sub leaves and boards it while the ship 's crew cheer him on . The sub crosses the and arrives at a small island in the that houses a German naval yard . sees being escorted off the sub and knocks out a sentry , stealing his uniform . , , and all inland . When they enter a canyon , holds them all at bay with a German rocket launcher , threatening to destroy the calls 's bluff , knowing wants to know what the contains as much as anyone . finds he ca n't carry out his threat , and is seized . At an elaborate ceremony atop the mountain , and , tied to a pole , can only watch as the is opened , but it contains nothing but sand , the remains of the stone tablets . No sooner is it opened , however , than its spirits suddenly appear . , remembering an ancient code that requires people to close their eyes and not look at the now - freed spirits , yells for to do the same . The two withstand the mayhem that ensues as the energy of the surges forth and its spirits attack the now - terrified Nazis , killing the entire contingent . and 's faces melt as they scream in horror . himself explodes . The energy mass surges high into the night sky , carrying every corpse toward the heavens , before returning to the and resealing it , leaving and drained but freed . Weeks later and feud with the officers over the whereabouts of the , angry that the has no idea what it has in the -- though it appears they in fact do understand what they have . However , the is sealed in a wooden crate , stamped with a government serial number and simply wheeled into a large warehouse containing thousands of similar - looking crates.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > A in the seven hundred years in the future , the is over - run with garbage and devoid of plant and animal life , the consequence of years of environmental degradation and thoughtless consumerism . The surviving humans are living on the spaceship after vacating centuries earlier . is operated by a large corporation called , whose BnL logo appears even on the artificial sun visible from the ship 's main concourse . The original plan was for humans to live in outer space for 5 years while cleaning robots ( " - " invented by ) prepared for recolonization . However , after seven hundred years , only one - ( voice : ) remains . - spends his days compacting debris into solid blocks and building structures with them . He also collects some of the more interesting artifacts and keeps them in the garage he shares with a cockroach , his only friend . At night he watches Hello Dolly on and dreams of having a hand to hold . Most of his finds are spare parts and electronics but one day he discovers a lonely plant . Not sure what it is , but recognizing that it needs soil and care , he picks it up and puts it in a dirt - filled old shoe . The next day , an enormous spaceship lands and deposits another robot , ( Extraterrestrial , voice : ) . - is immediately smitten and hopes to hold her hand , but is quick to use her plasma cannon , which can blast a hole through anything . flies around looking for vegetation but becomes distraught upon not finding any . - is finally able to approach her and takes her back to his garage where he shows her his collection of human artifacts . She still resists holding his hand , however , so he shows her the plant he found . This activates her prime directive : she takes the plant into a special containment capsule within her body , sends a signal to the mother ship , and goes into hibernation mode . Confused , - tries to make her safe and comfortable . He shelters her from thunderstorms and takes her to a park where he can watch the sunset next to her . Several days later , the mother ship returns and collects . - hitches a ride on the ship , which returns to the several light years away from . and - are examined in the landing bay . , still in hibernation mode , is taken away to the ship 's commander . - pursues her , followed by - ( voice : ) , a cleaning robot who is intent on scrubbing the filthy - to remove foreign contaminants ( i.e. dirt or earth ) . On the way , - sees humans for the first time . Obese and largely unable to move on their own , they are carted around the in hover chairs with video screens that allow them to communicate with one another and see a variety of advertisements for drinkable food products . When - accidentally knocks one of the humans , ( voice : ) , off his hover chair , - helps the man back into the chair and introduces himself . Confused but grateful , introduces himself in return . - tracks to the chambers of ( voice : ) , who is just as inert and catered to as the other humans . is confused but excited about , which is triggered by 's find . But when reactivates and orders her to produce the plant , it is missing . orders and - to be taken for repairs but , after they 've left , decides to educate himself about . In the repair bay , - mistakenly thinks is being harmed by the repair crew and uses her plasma cannon to save her , inadvertently releasing other robots who had been taken in for service . During the breakout , security robots take photos of them ; the ship 's computer announces to humans that and - are renegade robots . Angry , takes - to an escape pod to send him back to . Before she can put him in the pod , they see putting the plant in the escape pod . After leaves , - goes to rescue the plant but is blasted into space . Before the pod self - destructs , - uses the emergency escape hatch and a fire extinguisher to exit the pod with the plant . A joyous plays in space with - and even gives him an appreciative electric kiss . Using the garbage chute , and - E sneak into 's cabin to give him the plant . But ( voice : ) , the ship 's auto pilot system , reveals it was the one who stole the plant earlier . It has no intention of allowing a return to because of a centuries - old directive that was issued when the was believed to be permanently uninhabitable . Auto blasts - , and the plant back down the garbage chute and confines to his cabin . - and barely escape being shot into space with the rest of the refuse but - is badly damaged . Meanwhile , has figured out how to hack into the ship 's communication system and tells and - to head to the ship 's central deck , where a special machine will return the ship to earth when the plant is placed inside it . With the help of the robots they liberated earlier , - and make it to the central deck where the special machine has risen from a platform . Auto tries to force the machine back into the platform but is prevented by - manages to stand up on his own and shuts off . puts the plant in the special machine and the is whisked back to . - was grievously crushed in keeping from collapsing the platform . Once they reach , rushes - back to his garage and repairs him . - does n't recognize her and begins to compact garbage . , holds - 's hand and gives him an electric kiss again . This properly reboots - teaches the other humans how to nurture the plant and heal the planet . It will be much easier than they think because just outside the city , plants have already begun to flourish.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The Lives of is at once a political thriller and a human drama . The film opens in in 1984 with a sequence that alternates scenes from an interrogation with scenes from a training class for aspiring officers of the , or secret police . ( ) , code name XX/7 , is demonstrating his interrogation technique using audio of his own interrogation of a suspect . Wiesler instructs the students on how to tell whether a subject is lying . A student asks a question that Wiesler judges to be a bit too compassionate ( read " bourgeois " ) , and the professor marks the student 's name on the attendance record : surely this student has just flunked the course , or worse . During the feature 's first thirty minutes , writer / director draws a portrait of Wiesler that borders on caricature : Wiesler is a highly skilled officer of the , a proud , zealous , disciplined and entirely cold - blooded professional . He is one of the many cogs in the wheel of " the System , " working anonymously and tirelessly , convinced that his efforts are building a better Socialist society . At the end of the class , - ( ) , 's old school friend ( and probably his only friend ) , who has risen to the position of head of the at , comes to invite Wiesler to a theatrical premiere . The play is by the celebrated East German playwright ( ) , and its leading character is played by 's lover , - ( ) , an actress of great reputation . , who writes plays about the heroic proletariat , lives a rather comfortable life in a plush apartment , enjoying a certain notoriety among officials who value him because he 's one of the few East German writers whose work is read in the west . He preserves the respect of the artistic community by using his ( relatively ) secure position for occasional interventions in favor of dissident fellow artists . Wiesler at once suspects that 's loyalty to the party is not as strong as it would seem on the surface , even if the high party officials are convinced . Following the performance has a brief conversation regarding with ( ) , who also attended . Hempf is attracted to the leading lady . However , since is in the way , he must somehow be eliminated . Hempf , who happens also to be a member of the ( " Zentralkomitee " ) which has authority over the , tells about his reservations regarding the playwright 's loyalty to the ( " , " or ) , suggesting full - scale surveillance of . , always eager to better his own political future , asks his friend Wiesler to manage this procedure ( the highest level of monitoring of suspected individuals ) , code - named " . " ( is a Hungarian name -- perhaps a reference to the high suicide rates in , which we 'll touch on later . ) Soon after , meets and at a party , and in a rather unsubtle way lets - know of his feelings toward her . He also tweaks about the naivet of the belief displayed in his plays that people change ; Hempf is convinced that people never change . Wiesler stalks , noting his comings and goings , and while the playwright is away he has 's apartment systematically bugged . As the bugging team leaves the apartment , Wiesler notices that a neighbor is watching them through the peephole in her door . He knocks and tells the neighbor that if she tells anyone what she saw , her daughter will lose her place at university . Wiesler sets up his surveillance headquarters in the attic , just above the apartment . As and prepare for a party in the flat in honor of 's fortieth birthday , presents him with a necktie and reminds him that he promised to wear it . She wonders if he knows how to tie it , and he replies that he 's from the middle class and grew up wearing ties ; he 's since had to transcend his background ( presumably to succeed in a socialist state ) . When he goes into the hall to put on the tie , though , it becomes clear that he was not telling the truth , and he makes a mess of it . He nips across the landing to knock on his neighbor 's door and ask her to tie it for him . She comes into his apartment and ties the tie competently , but she 's so nervous ( about the surveillance ) that asks whether she 's sick -- but of course she ca n't tell him what 's the matter . The neighbor goes home with - none the wiser ; she 's mildly impressed at 's unexpected skill with a necktie . At the party 's close friend , theater director ( ) , is shunned by the other guests . Because has been blacklisted for his anti - government opinions he has n't been able to work for years ; now people are afraid to be seen talking to him . 's birthday gift to is sheet music for a work called for a . In a lunchtime scene at headquarters , a young agent starts to tell a joke about leader . He 's overheard and forced to finish it by , who then threatens to have him transferred to the most low - level , soul - crushingly boring job available , and finally claims he was kidding . Soon 's observations indicate that , contrary to his prejudices toward artists as free - thinkers , 's attitude toward the and its is not particularly scornful . In the meantime , - has been " convinced " by to be receptive to his advances , and when finds out about this development , it dawns on him that maybe has more to do with the libido of the than with the 's security . From his surveillance post , Wiesler makes 's doorbell ring to draw down to the street door in time to see the drop off and tell her when she must meet him again . is provoked to take action by the awareness of his lover 's coerced sexual relationship with the minister and the suicide of his blacklisted friend . After learning of 's death , sits at his piano and plays the piece gave him , the for a . Wiesler , listening in the attic , is moved to tears by the music . - comes in and quotes saying if he 'd kept listening to 's he 'd never have finished the revolution . Then he asks , " Can anyone who has heard this music , I mean truly heard it , really be a bad person?"In the following scene , a small child in an elevator asks if he 's really with the , and confides that his father says agents are bad men who put people in prison . Wiesler starts to ask the boy his father 's name , but stops himself . The film showcases 's empty life -- he apparently has no family -- in an episode with a prostitute . After sex he asks her to stay a little while , but she has another appointment . Saying that he needs to reserve any time he wants in advance , she leaves him alone . Dreyman resolves to help reveal the true face of the government to the outside world . With the help of well - positioned who provide him with a typewriter that ca n't be traced back to him , he plans to publish an anonymous expos in one of the leading West German weeklies , . The article concerns the government 's cover - up of the high suicide rate in ; the government stopped collecting suicide statistics in 1977 , at which time 's suicide rate was higher than that of every other country in except for . As they work on the article , 's friends worry about being overheard . is sure his apartment is n't bugged , but his friends suspect otherwise . They devise a test : a contact in comes to visit 's flat and they discuss his plans to return to with his son , an East German citizen , hidden under the seat of his car . They describe the car , a gold , and the intended route , then announce their departure . Wiesler hears everything but decides not to tip off the border guards . When the car makes it across the border , and his friends conclude that his apartment is safe and unbugged . Wiesler has heard enough by now to know that is writing something that will be smuggled out for publication in ; he 's in a position to provide a victory to the and a feather in his own professional cap by foiling 's plot . However , is starting to waver in his determination to bring to its conclusion . In the process of snooping in his victims ' everyday lives , including their love lives , he has unconsciously been drawn into their world , which in turn has put his own in question . At one point , he approaches a despondent - in a caf to tell her how much he admires her work . She replies that he 's a good man . He does not tell her his name . When Wiesler returns to the surveillance post , he learns that - went home to , skipping her appointment with the minister , and that she wo n't see the minister again . When 's article is finally published in the , it is a public disaster for the , and the playwright becomes a prime suspect . is incredulous that with all his expertise , could have missed the indications that was writing the article . ( Wiesler , like , has relied on 's cover story that he 's writing a play in honor of the 's 40th anniversary . ) uses - 's drug addiction as an excuse to have her arrested and threatens to terminate her acting career unless she collaborates with the authorities and denounces her lover as the author of the embarrassing article , which she does . The searches 's apartment , but comes up empty - handed . Now , who had withheld evidence concerning the source of the article , must decide where his allegiances lie : with the and his brilliant career as a top Stasi officer , or with and - , whose honest lives he has come to appreciate . In a tense scene , he sits in an interrogation room as - is brought in , knowing that she will recognize him from their encounter at the caf and that is watching through the one - way glass . But is too good an actress to give anything away . Wiesler offers her a choice : never work in the theater again , or become an informant and tell him where has hidden the typewriter he used to write the suicide article . He tells her that they already have enough evidence to put in jail , so there 's nothing she can do for him , but she can save herself and hide her involvement with the . She agrees , miserably . Wiesler rushes to reach 's apartment before the rest of the search team . He extracts the typewriter from its hiding - place and spirits it away . A newly released - comes home and feeds a line about being away in the country ; she 's in the shower when the team arrives and she emerges in her bathrobe in time to see start to pry up the floorboard that still , she believes , conceals the typewriter . She makes bleak eye contact with , who knows she must have told them where to look . She leaves the house before can get the board up to reveal -- nothing . When she reaches the street , - steps deliberately into the path of a truck and is hit . Wiesler speaks to her briefly as she lies bleeding in the road , but retreats as embraces her and apologizes ; he believes she removed the typewriter . She dies . , who seems slightly abashed by this development , calls off the investigation . However , he tells that although was clever enough to leave no tracks , knows he covered for . assures that he will spend the remaining 20 years of his career steaming open the correspondence of his fellow citizens in a dank basement . About five years later Wiesler is , indeed , steaming letters open in a basement office ; a colleague behind him is listening to the radio . ( It 's the same young officer who got in trouble for telling a joke about leader -- demoted despite 's assurance that he was kidding about punishing him . ) The young officer hears on the radio that the has fallen and shares his earpiece so Wiesler can listen too . When gets up and walks out of the office , the other workers follow him . Two years later , runs into ex ( who has survived the political upheaval very well , thank you ) , and asks him why his ( 's ) apartment was never bugged . Hempf ( before throwing in a spurious insult about 's inability to sexually satisfy - ) assures that his home was thoroughly bugged , tells him about , and advises him to look behind his light switches . does so , and then visits the archives , which have been made public . In the lengthy records of , he discovers gaps covering evidence that would have been damning , along with beneficial misinformation , all attributed to a agent identified as XX/7 . He also learns that - was released from custody too late to have extracted the typewriter from its hiding place , and he notices a red fingerprint on one of the pages -- left there by an agent who must have handled the mysteriously missing typewriter with its distinctive red ribbon . The file 's final entry notes the transfer and demotion of XX/7 , who is blamed for the failure of the operation . looks up 's real name and tracks down ( who now delivers mail for a living ) , but does n't speak to him . Two year later still , Wiesler walks past a bookstore advertising a new release with huge posters of the author 's face . The book , billed as a novel , is called for a , and the author is . Wiesler goes inside , opens a copy , and reads the dedication : to XX/7 , in gratitude . At the checkout counter the clerk asks whether he should giftwrap the book , and Wiesler replies , " no , it 's for me . "</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The film opens with the camera tracking down in , as police cars begin racing down it . The lifeless body of a young man , ( ) floats in the swimming pool of a palatial mansion . As the police begin converging on the house 's voice narrates , in flashback style , the events leading up to his own murder . Six months earlier , was down on his luck , unable to find work as a screenwriter , having only made a few undistinguished films in his short career . Broke and on the verge of having his car repossessed , with no other options except a low - paying newspaper job in , tries to persuade producer ( ) to buy his most recent script , but fails after script reader ( ) gives Sheldrake a harsh critique of the script in her summation . then tries unsuccessfully to borrow money from his friends . Fleeing from repossession men in his car , one of 's tires blows out in front of a large and seemingly deserted mansion on . Hiding the car in the garage , he sets out to explore the decaying house , when a woman inside calls to him . Mistaken for the undertaker to a recently deceased pet chimpanzee , he is ushered in by the mysterious butler , ( ) . Meeting the woman who owns the house , he recognizes her as long - forgotten silent - film star ( ) . When she learns that he is a writer , she invites him in and asks for his opinion on an immense script she has written for a film about that she hopes will revive her faded acting career . Although finds the script awful , he flatters into hiring him as an editor . is put up in her guest room . The next morning he objects when he sees that has moved his belongings to the mansion on 's orders , and that she has paid his overdue rent . Though he hates being dependent on her , he accepts the situation and begins living at the mansion , first in a room over the garage , then in the mansion itself . As he works on 's script , he comes to see how unaware she is of how her fame has died . She refuses to hear any criticism of her work , and makes him watch her old films in the evenings . Although she still receives fan mail , later learns that feeds into 's fantasy by sending the letters himself . He explains that 's state of mind is fragile , and she has attempted suicide in the past . Over the next few weeks , lavishes attention on and buys him expensive clothing , including a tuxedo for a private 's party attended only by the two of them . Horrified to learn that she has fallen in love with him , he tries to let her down gently , but she slaps him and retreats to her room . , thinking his time with her is over , escapes to a party at his friend , assistant director 's ( ) house , where he meets again . While still unimpressed with most of his work , she believes a scene in one of his scripts has potential . half - agrees to work on it with her , and calls the house on to tell he is leaving . However , when informs him that has attempted suicide with 's razor blade , leaves the party and returns to the mansion , where he apologizes to and makes love to her . After a while , considers her script complete , and sends it to at and waits for his answer . Not long afterwards , calls from asking for begin to arrive . They come from an executive named , and petulantly refuses to speak to anyone other than himself . Eventually , she has drive her and to the studio in her 1929 8A , a rare vintage luxury car . While entertains , many of the older guards , technicians and extras on the set recognize her and welcome her back . and , meanwhile , learn that had called because the studio wants to rent her car and has no interest in her script ( tells an assistant in private that the script is awful ) . insists that they hide these facts from her . He later confesses to that he was once a respected film director who discovered as a girl , and was also her first husband , and that he now remains as her servant because he can not bear to leave her . While undergoes a rigorous series of beauty treatments to prepare for her comeback , has secretly begun to work with on a screenplay . Though she is now engaged to , she falls in love with him . Although he likes her , is dismayed at the triangle in which he is now caught . When discovers the script with 's name on it , she phones and insinuates what sort of man really is . , hearing her , invites to the mansion to see for herself . When she arrives , he coldly terminates their relationship by letting her believe that he is a gigolo and prefers to live off . After leaves the mansion in tears , begins packing , having decided to return to . He bluntly informs of the truththat there will be no comeback , her fan letters come from , and she is forgotten . He ignores 's threats to shoot herself , and in a fit of passion she shoots him as he leaves , leaving him dead in the pool . The scene returns to the opening . Still narrating , expresses fear over how will be unable to cope with the disgrace , and the discovery of how forgotten she truly is . By the time the police arrive , however , she has completely broken with reality and slipped into a delusional state of mind , thinking the news cameras are set up for a film shoot . To help the police coax her down the stairs , plays along with her hallucination that she is on the set of her new film . He verbally sets up the scene for her , and yells " Action ! " ; dramatically descends her grand staircase . , in voiceover , remarks that life has decided to spare her the pain of that discovery , and that " The dream she had to so desperately had enfolded her . " makes a short speech at how happy she is to be back making a film , and delivers the film 's most famous line : " All right , , I 'm ready for my close - up . "</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > A voice - over narrator explains that and entered I in , 1914 and , with the construction of a continuous line of fortified trenches stretching from to the , a costly military stalemate set in . By 1916 , " successful attacks were measured in thousands of yards and paid for by casualties in the hundreds of thousands . "General ( ) , an elderly member of the , arrives from at the headquarters ( a magnificent chateau ) of his subordinate , ( ) , to inform him that a major offensive is planned for 's sector and , in preparation for this offensive , wants 's division to capture a well - defended German position nicknamed the ' Anthill ' . balks at the idea , claiming that his division is in no condition to defend the , much less capture it . Broulard reluctantly mentions that , in a completely unrelated matter , he was thinking that was due for a promotion , not that this should sway his decision concerning the feasibility of an attack on the . After explaining to at great length that the men he commands mean more to him than " all the stars and decorations in , " the ambitious concludes that an attack on the just might work . undertakes an inspection of the front line trenches with his loyal and cynical staff officer , - ( ) . The general stops to ask several soldiers ( who later become major characters ) the question , " Ready to kill more Germans ? " When one soldier ( ) fails to answer , merely staring straight ahead , his comrades reply that the soldier is suffering from shell shock . says there is no such thing as shell shock . When the general enquires about whether the soldier has a wife , the soldier replies that he 'll never see her again since he 's certain to be killed , to which scolds the soldier for acting like a coward . When the soldier replies that he is a coward , flies into a rage and strikes the soldier across the face , yelling that he wants this " little baby " transferred out of the regiment . As they continue through the trenches , - says that the general was right to do what he did and adds that he thinks that the high morale of the 701st is the direct result of the general 's inspections , which denies , saying that their fighting spirit was just born in them . The commander of the 701st , ( ) , is greeted in his headquarters bunker by . When . - makes a disparaging remark about the enlisted men , takes offense and asks the major to leave them alone to discuss the coming assault . is informed by of his plan to launch an attack on the , for which shows little enthusiasm . criticizes 's lack of enthusiasm and threatens to have him relieved of command if he does not agree to his plan . Not wishing to be " taken away from my men , " the colonel reluctantly agrees that the 701st will ( attempt to ) take the . That night , a patrol is ordered to be sent out to reconnoiter no - man 's land , the space between the opposing trenches . ( ) is among the two men chosen to accompany the half - drunk ( ) on this patrol . . ' fellow soldier remarks that the corporal does n't seem to like the lieutenant , to which . replies that he knew before the war and did n't have much respect for him then either . , having sought to bolster his courage with alcohol , leads the patrol through the barbed wire , water - filled shell holes , and general wreckage that is no - man 's land . When they come to a halt , orders the third member of the patrol to scout forward on his own , against the objections of . . As they wait for the third soldier to return , becomes increasingly nervous , saying he must have been killed . Finally , in a panic , throws a grenade into the darkness and runs back to the French lines , leaving . behind . . , crawling forward , discovers the third soldier lying in a shell hole , having been killed by 's grenade . A little later , when . shows up at 's command bunker , the lieutenant acts as if he 's happy to see that the corporal is still alive . But . confronts him with his crimes : drunk on duty , cowardice in the face of the enemy , killing a fellow soldier , etc . pretends to be sorry and points out that a court of inquiry is more likely to believe the word of a lieutenant than that of a corporal , so might as well forget it all happened . At that moment . arrives to pick up the report on the patrol , but states that it is n't finished yet . Dax clearly sees there 's something going on between and , but does n't pursue the matter . Dax has a final meeting with his officers to explain how the attack on the following day will proceed . One officer asks what the weather is supposed to be like , to which the colonel replies " Too good " -- meaning no rain or fog to provide cover for the troops advancing across no - man 's land . Another officer asks how long they will have to hold the once they 've captured it . Dax replies that they will have to hold it ( against enemy counterattacks ) for the entire day . While the officers discuss the details of the assault , the enlisted men consider what they will face in the morning . Conversing in whispers with another soldier , ( ) considers what his fellow soldiers are most afraid of : poison gas , high explosive shells , a bayonet in the gut ... He points out that what everyone is afraid of is pain , not death , since everyone knows that he 's going to die some day . His comrade , rolling over to get some sleep , replies " You 're too smart for me , professor . All I know is , nobody wants to die . "The following morning , accompanied by his ever faithful lackey . - , stands in an observation post waiting for the attack to commence . He offers his fellow officers a drink and they respectfully decline , leaving the general to toast the success of the assault on his own . In the trenches , is walking past the men of the 701st who are pressed up against the sides for cover against the artillery barrage , which is intended to screen the men as they advance towards the enemy ( this was known as a ' creeping barrage ' ) . The shells roar overhead and many fall perilously close , showering and his men with clods of dirt and waves of dust . ( In his initial discussion with about the assault , included a figure for the likely percentage of men who would be killed by their own barrage when calculating the possible casualties . This was , in fact , an unavoidable reality in the . ) A whistle between his teeth and a revolver in his hand , climbs a ladder as ( ) , staring at his wristwatch , counts down " ... three , two , one , zero ! " As blows his whistle and waves his men to " go over the top , " a mass of French soldiers emerges from the trenches into the open of no - man 's land . Carrying heavy packs , with their bayonets fixed , the men move forward as fast as possible , over torn remnants of barbed wire , down into and up out of shell craters , seemingly an inexorable wave . But shells burst amongst them and enemy machine gun fire can be heard . The men go down , a soldier here , another there , and more and more fall , individually and in heaps . Others behind them step over the bodies , only to drop and add to the piles . In the deafening confusion , covered in mud , asks a sergeant next to him where ' ' Company is , to which the sergeant replies he does n't know . in his observation post also notices the failure of ' B ' Company to advance . The general flies into a rage and orders his artillery to commence shelling the trenches occupied by the troops of ' B ' Company in order to force them to advance ( if only to escape from the shelling ) . The , ( ) refuses to comply with 's order . " , you have no right to order me to shoot down my own men without an order in writing and signed by the general . What if you 're killed , then where will I be ? " The psychopath replies : " You 'll be in front of a firing squad , that 's where you 'll be ! Hand over your command and place yourself under arrest for an immediate court - martial!"Meanwhile , , racing through the wreckage of his trenches , reaches and ' B ' Company . The drunk pleads with that they 've already tried twice and taken far too many casualties . Ignoring him , climbs a ladder while blowing his whistle , trying to encourage the men to " give it another try , " only to have a dead soldier falling from above knock him off the ladder . Around them , all the soldiers are falling back to their trenches . is informed in his observation post that the attack has failed all along the line . He instructs - to have the 701st pulled out of the line and to assemble a general court - martial . " If those little sweethearts wo n't face German bullets , they 'll face ones!"The following day , meets with and at headquarters , where the cynical accuses the entire 701st of cowardice and proposes to have 100 men from the regiment randomly executed . Dax strongly objects and intervenes to break up their argument . says they do n't want to slaughter the , they just want to set an example , to which replies that if it 's an example that 's needed , the logical choice is the officer most responsible for the attack . ( , of course , that if anyone should face a firing squad , it should be the . ) loses his temper and shouts , " This is not a question of officers ! " Regaining his composure , suggests that one man from each of the regiment 's three companies should be chosen to be tried for cowardice in the face of the enemy . Although he initially objects , accepts 's proposal . Before they leave , requests to be appointed defense attorney for the accused men and agrees , chiding for " hiding " , an obviously talented officer , from him . ( Earlier in the film it 's established that was one of 's top attorneys before the war . ) Outside in the hallway , confronts and virtually orders him to step down as the defense attorney , but the colonel refuses . rails against him for his apparent disloyalty and promises to ruin his career when this is over . When catches up with , they are met by the , , who says that had ordered him to meet with the general . Thinking fast , lies and says that he wanted to speak to the captain about some of his shells falling short and dismisses him . recommends a public hearing , the last thing wants , but talks out of it and the matter is forgotten . Dax meets with the three accused men . They include the intellectual , who was randomly picked by lot ; . , who chose because he knows what did during the patrol in no - man 's land the night before the battle ; and ( ) , who was chosen because his considered him to be a " social degenerate . " Dax explains that the reason they were chosen is irrelevant , since they are all charged with cowardice . He explains that he does n't have much time ( the trial is that afternoon ) and he needs to prepare . Dax urges them to show the same courage that they have shown in the face of the enemy . At the chateau , , , and sit in chairs in front of a group of officers behind tables in a large room . The officer serving as the chief judge of the ( ) begins the proceedings by calling one of the men to testify , but immediately objects , pointing out that the men have the right to hear the charges against them read out . The officer serving as the chief judge replies that the court does not wish to waste time with technicalities and that basically the charges are that these three men showed cowardice in the face of the enemy during the attack on the . Having been appointed ( by ) as the prosecutor , - grills each of the three men in turn , with cross - examining them to show that they are not cowards , all to little avail . The entire trial is a farce . sees his men 's rights violated by the cynical military judges ( who are clearly acting under the orders of , sitting nearby ) . is barred from entering any evidence relating to the case . In his closing argument to the judges , - asserts that the actions of the 701st during the attack on the were a stain on the honor of and , as such , asks the court to find these men guilty and impose the penalty of death to make an example of them . Afterwards , protests in his summation about the nature of the trial . speaks up , asking if he questions the legitimacy of the court , to which replies that he objects to the fact that he was given practically no time to prepare his case , no written indictment was ever made against the accused , that he was prevented from introducing evidence that would have been vital for the defense , that the prosecution presented no witnesses to back up their claims , and on top of all that , that no stenographic records of the trial were being kept . He says that the attack by the 701st on the was no stain on the honor of , but this trial is such a stain . He warns the officers serving as judges : " Gentlemen of the court , to find these men guilty would be a crime to haunt each of you till the day you die , " and pleads for mercy . The judges adjourn to deliberate . The next day , . is placed in charge of the guards for the prisoners . He strides up and down the line of men under his command , explaining the regulations and pointing out that he has been made personally responsible for anything that happens involving these prisoners , but that he will ensure that , if there are any mistakes , he will pass on any punishment with interest to the men under his command . Inside the stable in which they are being held , , , and consider their options . thinks he 's going to get out of it somehow . is worried what his wife will think . Eyeing a cockroach on the table , ruminates over the fact that if he 's executed the cockroach will have more contact with his wife and children than he will , it will be alive , while he 'll be dead . slams his hand down on the table and mutters , " Now you 've got the edge on him . " Dinner is brought in to the men . is suspicious that the food is drugged to make them groggy . thinks is being stupid , but refuses to eat anyway . Finally a priest ( ) arrives with news of the verdict ; they 've all been found guilty and will be executed in the morning . Ferol breaks down and the priest tries to comfort him . The priest asks if he would like to make his confession , but says that he 's not a religious man and that if he began praying now , he would feel like a hypocrite . The priest tells him that that would be an error and promises him that is there for him and that death comes to us all . , being eaten alive by the injustice of their situation , does n't take this well and mocks the priest , holding up a bottle of wine he is drinking and pretends to pray to it . The priest says that he is there to help them , but replies that back in his home town there was a cafe with an amusing sign above the bar that read , " Do not be Afraid to Ask for , for Our way of Refusing is very Polite . " becomes increasingly angry , while tries to restrain him , but he breaks free and punches the priest . then gets between them and warns not to try anything , but lunges forward and is forced to slug him . stumbles backwards , hitting his head on a stone column and a doctor is summoned . Having patched him up as best he could , the doctor remarks that has a very serious skull fracture and he may not live through the night . The priest asks whether they intend to execute a man in this condition , but the doctor informs him that the death sentence will be carried out and recommends pinching his cheek to wake him up in the morning if he still alive , since wants him to be conscious when he 's executed . That same night , arrives at 's quarters , asking what the colonel wanted to see him about . asks why he chose . to be court - martialed , saying that , of course the lieutenant had no personal motives for picking . Visibly nervous , replies that of course he had no personal reasons for choosing , it was just that someone had to be chosen . Dax explains that he has the same problem , he has to find someone to be in charge of the firing squad and asks if he would like the assignment . Taken aback , Roget protests by telling he has never overseen an execution before . Dax explains that it is a simple matter : the two primary responsibilities are to offer the men a blindfold and to put a bullet in each man 's head after the firing squad has finished . Despite additional protests by , dismisses him curtly from his quarters , telling him he 's got the job . As is leaving , the , , enters and tells the colonel that he has some information that may have an important bearing on the courts martial . is attending a lavish ball for general officers and other dignitaries when he is called away to the library , where he privately meets . Dax confesses that his is not entirely a social visit , and the general protests that he does n't want to go back over the whole affair , though he admits that , judging from the casualty reports , the 701st did make a serious effort . asks him why , if that is true , the three men should be executed . says perhaps the attack was doomed to fail , but , on the other hand , with a little more effort , the 701st might have captured the . then gently accuses of taking a narrow view of things , reminding him that the general staff is subjected to all sorts of unfair pressures from the press and politicians . Moreover , there 's the matter of the troops ' morale . " You see , colonel , troops are like children , and just as a child wants his father to be firm , troops crave discipline , and one way to ensure discipline is to shoot a man now and again . " Dax asks the general , " Do you sincerely believe the things you 've just said ? " , making a tactical retreat , excuses himself to return to the party , but as they walk towards the door Dax brings up the subject of 's order for his artillery to fire on his own troops during the attack . immediately slams the door to the library shut and turns around to face while he continues to describe what happened . The general asks if he expects him to believe something so fantastic . Dax produces the signed statements of , the telephone operator , and his own observations , asking the general what the press and politicians would do with such material should it ever be made public . Losing his temper , shouts " Are you trying to blackmail me ? ! " calmly explains that " too much has happened and someone has to take the blame . The question is who ? A general launches an impossible attack and , on the same day , orders his artillery to fire on his own men . But when that same general tries to have three innocent men executed , those men are saved by the intervention of the general staff . " pauses for a moment with the documents in his hand . Looking up at , " If you 'll excuse me colonel . I 've been rude to my guests for too long . " exits the room , leaving alone . At dawn the next morning , . opens the door to the stable to announce that it 's time to leave . . , struggling to act normal , tells the sergeant that he missed some great food the previous night . When the sergeant asks what they had , ca n't answer , but asks if the sergeant has anything to drink . The sergeant hands him a canteen and tells him to take a swig . begins to laugh , telling the sergeant that remarkably he has n't had one sexual thought since the court martial and then crumbles to the ground weeping . The sergeant tells to pull himself together , but , sobbing , asks why he has to die . The sergeant reminds him that many of his comrades are likely to die in the near future in combat , but , still sobbing , says he does n't care , he still does n't want to die . Finally , . tells that they have to go and that there are reporters present ; how does he want to be remembered by his wife and children ? Either he can walk out or be dragged out , in the end it 's the same . . collects himself , stands up and puts on his cap . With the rolling sound of drums in the background , the men of the 701st , standing at attention , are lined up on both sides of a path in a huge courtyard in front of a chateau on a beautiful sunny morning . The three condemned men slowly make their way down the path : marching upright , staring straight ahead , , unconscious and strapped to a stretcher , is carried along , and , completely unhinged , sobbing uncontrollably , has his arm around the priest who is accompanying him . They pass row upon row of soldiers ; they pass the , drums still rolling ; they pass a press photographer who takes their picture ; they pass and , and they pass . Finally they reach the posts they will be tied to in front of a wall of sandbags . Off to the side is a flatbed wagon with three coffins on it . The drums stop . The only noise is the sound of the firing squad 's boots on the loose gravel as they march into position , with the in command . Roget walks forward with blindfolds . 's stretcher is tilted up against the pole and the pinches his cheek . In a groggy state , looks with horror at the scene and appears to pass out once more . Skipping , offers a blindfold and , still crying , he accepts . then comes over to and asks if he wants a blindfold . angrily says " no " . Roget meekly says he 's sorry for what he 's done to him . does n't speak , but nods his head , implying that he accepts 's apology . Roget marches back to the firing squad , while - comes forward and , in a weak and halting voice ( in complete contrast to his performance as the evil and cynical prosecutor ) he reads out loud the orders for the execution . For a moment the only sounds are the chirping of the birds on a sunny morning . shouts out : " Ready , aim , fire!"A little later in the chteau over breakfast , expresses his pleasure that the executions went so well , that none of the condemned men spoiled it by doing something that would leave a bad taste in everyone 's mouth . " It had a certain splendor about it . " Broulard , choosing his words carefully , notes that he has never seen an affair of this kind carried out so well . When arrives , the gloating compliments him on his men dying well . Angry and disgusted , says nothing . Suddenly , and to 's surprise , mentions to that the colonel had come to him the night before claiming that during the attack on the , had ordered his artillery to fire on his own men . flatly denies the allegation , but states that he has signed testimony from numerous witnesses . says that it does n't matter for he 's certain that the general will come through it . " Come through what ? " asks with concern . " There will have to be an investigation . An inquiry , " but , notes , " the public will forget . " Horrified , stands up and shouts : " So I 'm the scapegoat , the only completely innocent man in this whole affair ! " Aware that his military career days are numbered , storms out of the room , claiming himself to be a true soldier . After leaves , comments that 's armies and military destiny can not be guided by arrogant fools like and then , turning to , asks : " How would you like to have 's job ? " is again taken completely by surprise , and replies " You 're offering me 's command ? " The elderly general responds " Come come , my boy , we all know you 've been after it from the start . " Dax responds angrily : " I am a lot of things , but I am not your boy . " sternly tells not to get defensive around him , but with 's days in the numbered and aware that he will be forced to resign his command regardless of the inquiry to be brought on him , his command needs a replacement and assumes that will do just right and it would be a shame for to lose the promotion before it is ever given to him . Dax replies : " , would you like me to suggest what you can do with that promotion ? " becomes furious with and shouts : " , you shall apologize at once or I will have you placed under arrest ! " Speaking in a subtle tone that quickly turns into anger replies : " I apologize .... for not being completely honest . I apologize for not showing my true feelings . I apologize for not telling you sooner that you 're a sick , degenerate , heartless , sadistic old man . And you can go to before I apologize to you now or ever again!"Briefly stunned by 's furious and defiant outburst , slumps back and sighs , now realizing that he was wrong about . In a calm tone , shakes his head and responds by saying : " , you are a disappointment to me . You 've spoiled the keenness of your mind by wallowing in sentimentality . You really did want to save those three men ... and you were not angling for 's command . " The impassive and unfeeling then ridicules by adding : " You 're not a soldier . You 're an idealist . For that I pity you as I would the village idiot . We 're fighting a war , . A war we 've got to win . Those men would n't fight , so I had them shot ; you brought charges against , so I demanded that he answer to them . Wherein have I done wrong ? " Dax replies , " You really do n't know the answer to that . I pity you for that . " Dax leaves . Now outside , wanders over to a tavern where he hears men from his regiment having a good time . ( It 's not clear if these are merely troops from the 701st or , perhaps , the men from the firing squad . ) The proprietor ( ) brings a young German woman ( ) , who is clearly frightened , on stage to entertain the troops . The men hoot and whistle and jeer ; " Talk in a civilized language ! " one yells out . , standing outside , cringes in disgust , seeming to reflect his general disillusionment with not only generals and , but the entire human race . But as the girl begins to sing the German folk song , " The Faithful " , the catcalls and whistles gradually die down and the men , captivated by the only decent , innocent being they 've come in contact with for a very long time , begin to hum along ; some of them even begin to shed tears . Outside the tavern , . appears before with word that the 701st has been ordered to return to the front . , his faith in common humanity restored , tells the sergeant to give the men a few minutes more , and walks away to his office as his smile turns into a hardened look once again . THE END</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > Former teacher and recovering alcoholic ( ) interviews for a caretaker job at the in an effort to rebuild his life after his volatile temper lost him his teaching position . The hotel manager , ( ) , warns that he and his family will be snowbound through most of the winter and of the potential risk for cabin fever . He drives the point home by recounting a season when the caretaker , , went crazy and killed his wife , his two girls ( and ) , and finally himself . Given his own desperation and the opportunity to pursue his true passion , writing , acknowledges the warning , but accepts the job . Meanwhile , 's son ( ) has a seizure while talking to his imaginary friend about the . He has a vision of blood splashing out of an elevator in the hotel , an image which is revisited several times throughout the film . Upon 's arrival at the hotel , head chef ( ) recognizes that is telepathic , and speaks to him mentally to offer him some ice cream . He explains that he and his grandmother both had the gift ; she referred to this communication as " shining . " He also counsels about the hotel , hinting that something terrible had happened there and left a trace , " as if someone burned toast , " which only people who can " shine " will perceive . Danny questions about what went on in the hotel , and about 237 in particular as can sense that is especially afraid of that room . Though he strives to assure that the images he sees in the hotel are just " like pictures in a book " and ca n't hurt him , sternly warns to stay out of that room . 's mental health deteriorates rapidly once the family is alone in the hotel . He has writer 's block , sleeps too little , and is irritable . has visions of the two murdered girls , but tells no one . He continues to wonder about 237.While the weather is still relatively warm , 's wife ( ) and walk through a maze of tall hedges , making a game out of it , stopping at dead ends and fixing their mistakes . One day , a ball rolls toward as he plays with his toys . It appears to have come from the open door of 237 , which enters . At that moment , comes running from the basement at the sound of 's screams in the lounge . He tells her that he had a nightmare in which he used an axe to chop and her to pieces . As a disconcerted promises that " 's gon na be okay , " appears at the other end of the room , looking disoriented and sucking his thumb . His sweater is ripped and there are bruises on his neck . He does not answer when asks what happened . She angrily accuses of hurting and takes the child back to their suite . is furious about the accusation . He storms around the hotel , making his way to the . Sinking defeatedly onto a stool at an empty bar , his head in his hands , declares that he would sell his soul for one drink . When he looks up he discovers a bartender ( ) , who serves him a drink . is nonplussed by the sudden appearance of the bartender and even addresses him by his name , . In the course of telling his troubles to , reveals that he unintentionally dislocated 's shoulder , the same accident mentioned to 's pediatrician earlier . Notably , states that the injury happened three years ago , while in explaining the same story to the pediatrician , said that , who vowed to quit drinking immediately following the accident , has currently been sober for only five months . A frantic enters , finding seemingly alone at the bar ; she pleads with him to investigate 's claim that " a crazy woman " attacked him in the bathtub of 237 . , who acts a bit tipsy , grudgingly agrees to go have a look . As approaches the door to 237 , appears to be having a seizure in his own room . , back at his home in , stares wide - eyed as he picks up on a signal is sending . cautiously enters 237 . The bedroom is empty and he proceeds to the bathroom . He watches lustfully as a young , beautiful , naked woman ( ) pulls back the shower curtain and steps slowly out of the bathtub . The two approach each other and embrace in a passionate kiss . catches a glimpse of their reflection in the mirror and sees the woman is actually a rotting corpse . He recoils in the young lady standing before him has transformed into an elderly woman ( ) ; a walking corpse with rotten , sagging skin . She cackles madly while reaching for him with outstretched arms . Stunned , staggers out of the room , locking the door after him . When he reports back to , denies anything amiss in 237 . suggests they take to a doctor . becomes irate , lecturing on her thoughtlessness and blaming her for everything that 's gone wrong in his life . Insisting that they ca n't leave the hotel because of his obligation to his employers , he storms out , returning to the , which is now the scene of an extravagant party with guests dressed in 1920 's fashion . serves him a drink and strolls through the crowd . He does n't get far when a butler carrying a tray runs into him , spilling advocaat on his jacket . The butler convinces to come into the bathroom to clean up . The butler introduces himself as ( ) . remembers the story told him about a former caretaker named murdering his family and confronts with the information . denies that anything of the sort took place and furthermore insists that has " always been the caretaker . " is confused , but seems to accept 's story . goes on to tell that has " a great talent " and is using it to bring an " outside party " into the situation , referring to with a racial slur . advises on how to " correct " , and how to deal with if she interferes . Back in , has had no luck contacting the people at the . Worried about , he books the next flight to . At the , arms herself with a baseball bat and looks for , intent on leaving the hotel with whether or not agrees to come . Entering the lounge , she spots 's manuscript left unattended next to the typewriter . She reads what has been writing : hundreds of pages of repetitions of a single sentence : " All work and no play makes a dull boy . " She realizes that has gone mad . approaches from behind and asks sarcastically , " How do you like it ? " Wendy shrieks with alarm and wheels around to face him . A confrontation ensues as demands to know her intentions regarding leaving the hotel with , while retreats , brandishing the bat . She screams at not to hurt her , and he swears that he will not ; instead , he intends to kill her . hits on the head with the bat at the top of a flight of stairs , causing him to lose his balance and tumble down the staircase , injuring his ankle in the process . drags 's limp body to the pantry and locks him inside , just as he regains consciousness . tells her he has sabotaged the radio , as well as the snow cat , stranding them all there . She goes outside to check on the snow cat , and confirms what he told her . A few hours later , is roused from a nap by the sound of 's voice . expresses disappointment and a lack of confidence in , but assures him he can get the job done if given one more chance . The pantry door then suddenly unlocks . has fallen asleep in her room . is in a trance , carrying a knife and muttering " redrum " repeatedly . He takes 's lipstick and writes " REDRUM " on the bathroom door . He begins shouting " REDRUM , " which wakes . She clutches him to her , then sees the reflection of the bathroom door in the mirror . Reversed , it reads : " MURDER . " At that instant , banging sounds start coming from the door to the hallway . The sound is swinging an axe at the locked door . Wendy grabs and locks them in the bathroom . She opens a tiny , snow banked window and pushes out ; he slides safely to the ground . She tries to get out the same window , but can not fit . She tells to run and hide . Meanwhile , has chopped his way through the front door and calls out " , I 'm home ! " then knocks politely on the bathroom door . holds the knife and tries to steady herself as begins chopping into the door . After chopping away one of the panels , he sticks his head through and screams " 's JOHNNY ! " ( a reference to The Starring ( 1962 ) ) . sticks his hand through the door to turn the lock . slashes at him with a knife , cutting 's hand and sending him recoiling in pain . continues to hack at the door with the axe until they both hear the low rumble of an approaching snow cat engine . He stalks out . The snow cat driver is . Inside the hotel , he calls out , but gets no reply . , hiding behind a pillar , leaps out and swings the axe into 's chest , killing him . , hiding in a kitchen cabinet , screams , revealing his location . He clambers out of the steel cabinet and runs outside . Meanwhile , has ventured from the bathroom and begun to search for . The hotel has sprung to life and now even encounters its ghosts , sights that shock and horrify her . At the same time , axe - wielding turns on the outdoor lights and follows into the hedge maze . realizes he is leaving a trail of footprints in the snow for to follow . He carefully retraces his steps , walking backwards in the same prints he 'd just created in the opposite direction , then covers the rest of his tracks and hides behind a hedge . When arrives , he sees that the trail of footprints ends abruptly , giving him no clue as to which direction took . He chooses a path and lurches deeper into the maze . comes out of his hiding spot and follows his own footprints back to the maze 's entrance . makes her way out of the hotel just as emerges from the maze . Relieved , she flings down the knife and embraces him . bellows his frustration from within the maze . and waste no time escaping in the snow cat that used to get to the hotel . , hopelessly lost in the maze , freezes to death . Right before the end credits , the camera slowly zooms in on a wall in the hotel full of old photographs that chronicle the hotel 's history . An old recording of " , the and You " echoes in the empty hallway . In the center of one picture is a young . The caption reads , " , 4th , 1921."</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > During a battle in the last months of , the protagonist , an unnamed soldier ( known only in the credits as A Jewish ) , is fighting for the in the army of the fictional nation of , comically blundering through the trenches in combat scenes . Upon hearing a fatigued pilot pleading for help , the attempts to rescue the exhausted officer , . The two board 's nearby airplane and fly off , barely escaping enemy ground fire . Schultz reveals that he is carrying important dispatches that could win the war . However , the plane loses fuel and crashes in a marsh . They both survive , but the suffers from memory loss . As medics arrive , gives them the dispatches , but is told that the war has just ended and lost . Years later , as the is released from the hospital , ( also played by ) , the ruthless dictator of , has undertaken to persecute throughout his country , aided by of the and of and of . The symbol of 's fascist regime is the " double cross " , and at times , when he 's excited or angry , speaks in a macaronic parody of the German language . During his first speech , his is " translated " by an overly concise - speaking news voice - over . The , unaware of 's rise to power , returns to his barbershop in the Jewish ghetto . When he opposes the painting of the word " " on his barber shop by storm troopers , he flees from them , aided in part by his neighbor , , who knocks some of them unconscious with a frying pan . The is nearly lynched by a gang of storm troopers , but , now a high - ranking officer in 's regime , intervenes . Though surprised to see the man who saved his life at the end of the war is not an , as he previously imagined , he returns the favor by ordering the storm troopers to take no action against him or , even when she throws an object at a storm trooper 's head . Hynkel relaxes his stance on in an attempt to woo a Jewish financier into giving him a loan to support his regime . Egged on by , has become obsessed with the idea of being of the , dancing at one point with a large , inflatable globe , to the tune of the Prelude to Act I of 's . Hynkel plans to invade the neighboring country of ( ) , and needs the loan to finance the invasion . When the Jewish financier refuses due to the persecution of the , reinstates and intensifies his persecution of the contrary to 's advice . When , who is empathetic to the , voices his objection to the pogrom , Hynkel denounces as a supporter of democracy and a traitor , and orders him placed in a concentration camp . The evades storm troopers who have heard of the arrest by hiding on his neighbor 's roof with , however his shop is burnt down . Schultz flees to the ghetto and begins planning to overthrow the regime with , the and other residents there . proposes a suicide mission to blow up the palace , the agent will be chosen by a coin in a pudding . However causes this to be abandoned by placing coins in all the puddings . Later the is searched for . He and the , hiding on the roof , are captured and condemned to the camp . is initially opposed by , dictator of , in his plans to invade , and even plans to declare war . However just after he signs a declaration of war he receives a call from . He invites him and his wife to his palace and a seeing of a military show to impress him with a display of military might and psychological warfare , but this ends in disaster . After some friction , a comedic food fight between the two leaders , and a deal between the two leaders on which immediately reneges , his invasion proceeds . and others from the had emigrated to to escape , but once again they find themselves living under 's regime . Schultz and the escape from the camp wearing Tomainian uniforms . Border guards mistake the for , to whom he is nearly identical in appearance . Conversely , , on a duck - hunting trip , falls overboard and is mistaken for the and arrested by his own soldiers . The , now forced by circumstance to assume 's identity , is taken to the capital of to make a victory speech . , in introducing " " to the throngs , decries free speech and argues for the subjugation of the . The barber then makes a rousing speech , reversing 's antisemitic policies and declaring that and will now be a free nation and a democracy . He calls for humanity in general to break free from dictatorships and use science and progress to make the world better instead . , now an impoverished laborer in a vineyard in , hears the barber 's speech on the radio , and is amazed when the addresses her directly : " , can you hear me ? Wherever you are , look up , . The clouds are lifting . The sun is breaking through . We are coming out of the darkness into the light . We are coming into a new world , a kindlier world , where men will rise above their hate , their greed and brutality . Look up , . The soul of man has been given wings , and at last he is beginning to fly . He is flying into the rainbow into the light of hope , into the future , the glorious future that belongs to you , to me , and to all of us . Look up , . Look up ! " As she rises , asks , " , did you hear that ? " The girl silences him with a gesture , saying , " Listen , " and turns her face , radiant with joy and hope , toward the sunlight</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > SPOILER : and his - , , and - have attacked 's Asgardian ship in search of the , which is housed in the that had stolen before 's destruction . With already possessing the after decimating , ' army swiftly defeats the . After a futile counter - attack from the , offers the to in exchange for 's life - only to be killed himself when anticipates 's attempt to betray and kill him . Moments before kills him , uses the power of the Bifrost to send to . and his Children then depart just after uses the stone to destroy the ship , leaving a mourning behind and stranded in space . Hulk crash lands at the in and is reverts back to , who informs and about ' impending arrival . Strange and contact and brief him about the and . Realizing they must find to protect the embedded in his head , realizes he must make contact with to find , who has gone off the grid with . Just then , and Obsidian arrive in to seize the from , and , , and confront them . Having been traumatized by his defeat at the hands of , finds himself unable to transform into the and help in the battle . Maw incapacitates and captures Strange ; and pursue his spaceship off while stays behind to protect the . contacts the rest of the . In , where and have been hiding , the two are ambushed by and , but , and fight them off . They decide to seek shelter in the in , where they meet , who is once again mobile with bionic leg braces . proposes that destroy the in his forehead to keep from retrieving it . immediately refuses however suggests that they travel to the one place that has the technology to safely remove the stone from without killing him : . is rescued by the of the , who had picked up the Asgardian ship 's distress call . Thor guesses that would next be after the , which is in the possession of the in , but first he must retrieve a new weapon capable of killing from the dwarven planet of , where the only forge that can create such a weapon exists . Thor orders with him to , while , , and travel to . On the way there , talks to , making him promise to kill her if the situation presents itself . reluctantly promises he will . In , ambushes the , having already retrieved the and created an illusion of an intact to trap them . He captures after a crucial moment when begs to kill her , using the to escape . reveals that he knows that already knows the location of the after prying information from a tortured . escapes and signals the remaining to meet her on , ' home world . and travel to the planet of the , , where the , the 's keeper , informs him that retrieving the carries a heavy price : it can only be retrieved by sacrificing the life of someone he truly loves . Despite his reluctance , tearfully throws off a tall cliff to her death and is granted the . and rescue from 's torture chamber , and launch out of the ship , killing him . Strange believes they should retreat to protect the but disagrees ; he believes they should take the fight to instead of retreating like they 've done in the past . The three leave to confront on , where they meet , and and formulate a plan to remove ' gauntlet . While discussing their tactics , uses the to view alternate futures , telling them he 'd seen 14,000,605 of them , with only one where the win . Thanos teleports to , where , after a brief conversation with meant to distract him , the group engage hand - to - hand and manage to subdue him . is able to calm while and attempt to pry the gauntlet from his arm . and , who 'd arrived on during the battle , deduce that is dead ; an enraged retaliates , hitting and breaking the group 's hold on him . takes the gauntlet back and defeats the group , threatening to kill unless gives him the . Strange does so and tells they 've " entered the end game . " adds the stone to his gauntlet and . , and arrive at an abandoned and desolate . Thor is puzzled that the giant forge is inactive . The giant dwarf tells them that forced the dwarves to create his gauntlet ; in return , killed all the dwarves except for . After laboring to reactivate the forge and reignite the star that powers it , the four create , a battle axe that serves as 's new weapon and grants him the power of the . Meanwhile , the arrive in and task with safely extracting the from . ' army arrives and begins attacking , and the , alongside the armies led by , mount a defense against ' forces . Glaive infiltrates 's lab and attacks . The begin overwhelming the defending armies before , and arrive to join the battle . The tide seems to be turning for the , , and are killed , but arrives for the . A tearful destroys the still - implanted in to prevent from retrieving it , but uses the to reverse the event and pry out the from , killing him again . Thor attacks and drives into ' chest , but survives long enough to snap his fingers with the gauntlet . On a faraway world he finds as a child . When he confirms that he achieved his goal , she asks him what it cost . His answer is " Everything . " Back on , looks on in horror as , his gauntlet now battered from the effort and his left arm and part of his chest burned , teleports away . Thanos ' goal of eradicating half of all life in the universe comes to fruition as people begin disintegrating : , , , , , , , , & all turn to ash and fade away . In , only , , , , , , and remain of the heroes . On , only and are left alive . Thanos awakens on another lush , green planet , his chest wound healed , and serenely watches the sunset , smiling slightly , satisfied at having achieved his ultimate goal . In a post - credits scene , the is in chaos as people begin dissolving into ; driver - less cars crash on the street and a helicopter is seen crashing into a skyscraper and exploding . Former S.H.I.E.L.D. and witness the scene on the street before they dissolve themselves . Before he vanishes , manages to send a final distress signal to Marvel.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > A few years after , in , ( ) , is accused of murdering a rich widow , ( ) , who has recently changed her will and bequeathed him a substantial sum of money . ( ) , a skilled lawyer who has Just be released from hospital , is asked to defend . 's doctor has instructed him to avoid excitement . After his hand - picked replacement barrister expresses doubt over 's innocence , decides to handle the case himself , despite protests from his nurse ( a conversation with ( ) and assessing her attitude , decides not to call on her to testify in defense of her husband . In the courtroom , surprisingly appears as a Witness for the . A parade of circumstantial evidence points to being the likely murderer . 's testimony does not provide an alibi for her husband . All seems lost as the defense concludes its case . But a late night phone call reveals new evidence that wrote letters to an anonymous lover named about purposely denying her husband an alibi to get her freedom . This evidence changes the jury 's opinion and is acquitted . However , suspects something is amiss with this sudden reversal and dramatic convenient evidence . All is revealed in the last dramatic court scene , as admits to deliberately sabotaging her own testimony with the letters , to get her guilty husband freed . But in the penultimate twist , shows his true stripes and reveals his intention to leave his " wife " for a younger woman . Christine seizes the knife used as evidence of an accidental cut causing 's bloody jacket and , in full view of , his nurse ( ) , and the other woman , , killing him . cancels 's planned trip to and announces he will defend in her trial for > 

 < synopsis > After the opening credits , we see a spacecraft drifting slowly through space . Inside is ( ) , the only survivor from the previous movie , having escaped in the shuttle of the mining ship , which she blew up after an aggressive and hostile alien species was responsible for killing her colleagues . is still in peaceful cryogenic sleep with the crew 's pet cat , , lying on top of her . A proximity alert goes off : the shuttle is intercepted by a salvage vessel . The crew , believing they 'll be allowed to salvage an abandoned shuttle , uses a welding torch to open the door and enters , finding that is still alive . In , a space facility orbiting , regains consciousness in a hospital . A nurse tells her she is in a medical bay . She is visited by ( ) , a representative of - ( the from the previous movie , and 's employer ) who brings the cat along . When states that she does not recognize the medical bay , gives her some terrible news : she has been in hypersleep for 57 years , her spacecraft having drifted through space until the salvage vessel discovered it by very fortunate coincidence . shows clear distress and discomfort , when starts hissing at her as she starts to convulse in the bed . Burke calls for medical attention , and the staff attempt to restrain . She pleads with them to kill her , before pulling her shirt up to reveal something pushing out of her stomach . suddenly wakes up bolt - upright in the hospital bed , clutching her chest , revealing the scene to be a nightmare . A nurse on the monitor next to her bed asks her if she needs something to help her sleep , but declines . The nurse was the one featured in her dream ; the dream was a recollection from a real encounter with , apart from the alien bursting out . Some time later , is sitting in an simulated environment waiting for , who wants to prepare her for a board hearing . The has started a formal investigation into what happened with the , and wants to question about her role in its destruction . is only interested in hearing news about her daughter . hesitantly hands her a picture of an older woman and tells that her daughter has passed away from cancer while she was drifting through space . Devastated , whispers that she promised her daughter that she would be back for her 11th birthday before going off on the . During the inquiry , desperately tries to convince the board of the dangerous nature of the and the potential threat of the derelict ship , which still contains hundreds of eggs . She explains that Company policies at the time gave the crew orders to obtain the creature , which killed the crew and caused the destruction of the ship . However , the board is extremely skeptical of 's testimony . Because she admits to having destroyed the and evidence of the Alien creature is lacking , they treat her as if she 's mentally unstable . The board does not press criminal charges , but revokes her flight license and submits her to psychiatric supervision . Upon asking why no one will go to the planetoid to confirm her story , is shocked to learn that the planetoid , now known as , has already been colonized by terraformers for 30 years , who are creating an atmosphere to make the air breathable and the planetoid habitable . Some time thereafter , at the colony headquarters on , two employees discuss recently received orders to investigate a certain unsurveyed part of the surface of the planetoid . A surveyor is currently doing the job , wondering if he can make a claim to anything he finds . The higher - ranking man complains how they never got an answer to the question why those particular coordinates were so interesting , but assures him that anything found can be claimed . Outside on the barren and stormy planet surface , the aforementioned surveyor , together with his wife , son , and daughter , whom is called " " ( ) , discovers the same derelict ship previously found by 's crew . He and his wife go in to investigate , but after a very long while , the wife comes back and calls for help on the radio : her husband is lying on the ground with a creature attached to his face ( a facehugger like the one that attacked in the previous movie).Released on her own recognizance , gets an apartment at . Some time later , she is visited by , who is accompanied by ( ) of the . tells that contact with the colony on has suddenly been lost . Fearing that Aliens are responsible , the intends to send a squadron of ; they would like her to serve as an adviser , as she has personal experience with this species . will come along , as the co - financed the colony . is aware that has taken a job on , running loaders and forklifts , work that is clearly beneath her . As a further incentive , - has agreed to reinstate as a warrant officer if she goes . refuses , as she dreads going back to the place where she first encountered the alien , and because she 's still frustrated that nobody at the believed her earlier story . But as her nightmares continue , she feels that if she does not go on the mission , she will never find any peace . She calls , and when he assures her that the mission to is to eradicate any , not to study or capture them , she gives in . will remain on the station . A massive warship , the , travels through deep space . Inside are colonial marines led by , accompanied by and . After awakening from hypersleep , seasoned veteran sergeant ( ) quickly takes command . discovers that most of the marines are a wisecracking , undisciplined lot who joke around and do not seem to take the threat seriously at all . One tough female marine named ( ) refers to as " " , and the marines seem to have a low opinion of their inexperienced ranking officer , who shows little interest in getting to know his squad members . is also dismayed to learn that a synthetic named ( ) is accompanying them on the mission as their science officer ; she mistrusts synthetics ever since her altercations with ( from the previous movie ) . tries to assure her that the new generation of ' artificial persons ' ( as he calls it ) all have behavioral inhibitors and are therefore incapable of hurting humans ; however , angrily dismisses his attempts to befriend her . As the approaches , tells the marines about her experiences with the ( dubbed ' xenomorphs ' by ) during a mission briefing , but they are still rather undisciplined and scoff at the possible threat the creatures pose . During weapons detail , gradually begins to impress the soldiers , offering to help them load their dropship and displaying her expertise with the large power loader ( a hydraulically enhanced suit ) . ( ) takes a special interest in , impressed with her strong personality and her way with people . Taking the dropship from the to the planet , the marines have no problems with being dropped into the planet 's atmosphere , but seems uncomfortable . He confesses that he has hardly any experience with these kind of missions , further undermining the opinion the marines have on him . One of the soldiers , Private ( ) is loudly boasting his courage and the supreme firepower that they have at their disposal . The dropship clears the clouds and flies over the colony , which is a gigantic man - made structure , but without any visible activity . explains that the facility contains an atmosphere processor designed to make planets suitable for human life , and that - manufactures them . The ship lands and deploys an armoured personal carrier ( ) with the marines inside before taking off again . The marines exit the and enter the main colony complex door . They sweep the building with motion trackers , but find the building deserted , save for a few laboratory mice left behind . The marines discover evidence of a fierce battle , including several barricades , hits from small arms and acid - burns on the ground , implying that there were casualties among the aliens as well . They conclude the building is safe for now , which does n't believe . , and enter the building , but is visibly affected by dark memories . In the medical lab , they finally happen upon evidence of 's story : in a series of stasis tubes , they find several facehugger organisms , the spider - like creature that attaches itself to the face of a host . Two of them appear to be still alive . finds a file describing an attempt to remove a facehugger from one of its victims before it could implant an embryo ; the removal resulted in the death of the subject . and the others make an even more startling discovery : a little girl , about eleven years old , has survived the assault on the colony . She runs away under the floor grating at the sight of the marines , but succeeds in winning her trust . Her name is ( she 's the daughter of the surveyor family seen in the movie 's beginning ) . Initially , the girl is non - communicative , seemingly in shock , but eventually gets through to her ; she calls herself " " , and tells that her parents and the others are dead . Everyone has become a victim of the and she would feel safer if she could return to her hiding place in the ventilation system . assures her that she will be safer with herself and the marines . The cocky tracks the colonists by using homing devices embedded in their skin , and discovers that the entire population seems to be crowded underneath the primary heat exchangers of the facility . The team take the to the atmosphere processor , where and the marines get out and and remain aboard with and to coordinate the sweep from a distance . While descending into the facility , the marines discover strange organic , hive - like structures that must have been secreted by the . realizes that the marines are walking next to the colony 's nuclear reactor , and that their armor - piercing weapons could do serious damage to it that could cause it to explode . Gorman orders them to hand in their high - caliber ammunition ; however , both and secretly reactivate their smart - guns , using spare connectors had hidden in her equipment . As the team enters the basement , they find an hive containing the dead bodies of the colonists , cocooned as hosts for the Alien facehugger parasites . One colonist is still alive , but she starts to convulse upon awakening , asking them to kill her . Suddenly , an infant alien ( a chestburster ) bursts its way out of her chest . The marines kill it with a flamethrower , but the sudden stir awakens the dormant warrior aliens , which are concealed inside the walls which offer them effective camouflage . They begin to attack , causing one marine to misfire her flamethrower , causing an explosion of an ammunition stash . The resulting disorientation proves disastrous , as the disoriented marines have no idea where the attackers are coming from , and are quickly reduced in their numbers . The marines start firing back at random , some with the restricted ammo , but the chaos and noise make it hard for anyone ( especially and ) to focus and organize a coordinated defense . Apone is suddenly attacked and incapacitated , causing an unprepared to panic . Angered and frantically shouting at for his lack of control , takes control over 's protests , driving the all the way down the service ramps into the nest to rescue the surviving marines . Only four make it back to the , and one , , is killed by acid from an exploding shot by . recovers , and . Hicks manages to kill an that tries to enter the with a shotgun blast ( " Eat this ! " ) , which results in a large acid burn on 's arm . is knocked unconscious while drives the out of the facility , crushing an under the wheels along the way and driving straight through a closed metal door . The escape destroys the 's transaxle , rendering the vehicle largely immobile . On the planet 's surface , in the , the survivors discover that several of their missing colleagues ( Sarge and ) are still displaying lifesigns on the monitor . assures them nothing can be done , as they are being cocooned like the colonists to be hosts for more facehuggers and chestbursters . recommends they nerve gas the area , but they opt against it , as there is no guarantee that the Aliens are even susceptible . loses his nerve , and expresses only cowardice and panic . suggests taking off and nuking the entire site from orbit , but protests , as he is concerned about the dollar value of the facility . " They can bill me , " replies . continues to protest , citing the importance of the species , and claiming that no one has the right to arbitrarily exterminate them . Despite , and protesting , he refuses to authorize the use of nukes . However , stipulates that it is a military operation now , and the ranking officer , , is now in command . seconds 's motion of nuking the site from orbit over 's objections , and summons the pilots of the dropship . As re - enters the dropship , finding some slime before closing the ramp . An that has slipped on board kills the pilot ( ) in mid - flight , and the ship crashes as the rest of the marines barely flee the crash site . Part of the dropship collides with the , destroying it and most of the team 's weaponry . and the others are now stranded on the planet surface , with no means of returning to the , and is starting to annoy the group with his incessant whining . warns them that they should get back " because it will be dark soon and they mostly come at night , mostly " . They retreat back into the main colony complex , where treats and the rest survey the limited remaining weapon arsenal they were able to salvage from the wreckage . The bad news is that there are only a few intact pulse rifles and flamethrowers left . However , amongst the salvaged items are four sentry guns , remote operated machine guns that can target objects automatically . Upon hearing that a rescue team can be expected no earlier than 17 days , starts panicking again , yelling that the aliens will infiltrate the complex again and kill them , but finally reprimands him , and points out that has survived an even longer period without weapons and training . The survivors decide to fortify the barricades and seal off all possible access routes for the into the main colony complex . The plan is quickly brought into action and even shows some determination again . The sentry guns are placed at strategic locations where the aliens are expected to attempt and enter the building . A test shows that they function optimally . consolidates 's trust by giving her a small locator to wear on her wrist , so he can find her anywhere inside the complex . puts to bed and checks inside her doll head " " for scary dreams . explains to that does n't have bad dreams because she 's just a piece of plastic . wonders about what happened to her mother - especially if one of the came from inside her mother - but ca n't give her the answer . She tells about her own daughter , who has also died . is scared to go to sleep , so puts her locator on and assures her she can find her anywhere in the complex now . has discovered that the ' acid blood neutralizes after exposure to air . The group is discussing the , and their way of reproduction : humans are used as hosts for the facehuggers , which come from eggs ; but who or what produces these eggs ? proposes a large , dominant female , a queen , such as in a social insect colony . tells to destroy the two remaining facehuggers , but he tells her he got specific orders from to keep them alive . Ripley confronts about it ; he wants the specimens taken back to because the weapons industry will pay large amounts of money for them . He even tries to enlist her help in smuggling them past quarantine . refuses ; moreover , she has checked the colony log and learned that was responsible for sending the colonists to the derelict ship , after he learned about its existence from during her trial . blames for not warning the colonists about the danger , but maintains he simply wanted the colonist to accidentally find it , in order to lay a valid claim on the ship ; he puts it aside as a bad call . A suddenly enraged grabs him by the lapels and angrily vows to expose his treachery when they return to . As exits the room , the alarm sounds : the Aliens have arrived at the first set of sentry guns inside an access tunnel . The guns kill many of them , but they quickly run out of ammunition , as the ' numbers are vastly superior . calls in . There is another problem : the nuclear reactor at the terraforming tower has started emergency venting . They learn that damage to the structure has caused it to malfunction ; the cooling units have failed and the core will explode within four hours . Damage from the crash has made it impossible to shut down the reactor from their location . Remotely calling the second dropship from the is also impossible , as the transmitter was on the and was wrecked in the crash . The only option is to go to the uplink tower and manually remote - pilot the 's second dropship to the surface . relapses into his desperation act again , refusing to go ; however , unexpectedly offers to crawl through a small conduit to the uplink tower , as he is the only one qualified to pilot the ship anyway . The second set of sentry guns in the lower hallway empties its ammo into the hoard of . A great many creatures advance on the unmanned guns , but eventually they stop , not realizing that the guns have almost run out of ammunition . Apparently , the attempts to stop the ' advance have temporarily succeeded . Hicks has and check the perimeter . He promises he will not let her die by the , preferring to kill them both rather than falling victim to the creatures . He then gives her a crash course in how to use an 10 pulse rifle , with an over and under 30 mm pump - action grenade launcher , and there appears to be a subtle attraction between them . On her way back to , passes by , who has regained consciousness , and is clearly embarrassed by his earlier conduct . She returns to and finds her curled up asleep , hiding underneath the bed . Instead of waking her , joins her underneath for a nap , laying her pulse rifle on the bed for safekeeping . Meanwhile , has crawled through the narrow conduit and reached the uplink tower , and is preparing the other dropship for departure . wakes up to find two empty stasis tubes on the floor : the two facehuggers have escaped . They are locked inside the lab and the pulse rifle has been taken . and are attacked by a scurrying facehugger , but fends it off and tries to signal the marines through a surveillance camera ; however , as keeps updating and his crew about the drop ship , slyly turns off the monitor to prevent the others from seeing 's cry for help . manages to trigger the fire alarm with her cigarette lighter , but this also draws out the facehuggers ; , , and arrive just as a facehugger attempts to attach itself to 's face , and the second one threatens . The facehugger threatening is killed immediately by ; and get the second facehugger off and throw it into a corner , where kills it with a pulse - rifle as it tries to attack again . In the room , knows it must have been who was acting in retaliation to her promise to expose him ; she suggests that intended to impregnate her and with the facehuggers , then sabotage the other marines ' cryotubes so as to eliminate any witnesses . He would emerge back at as the only survivor , and smuggle the in the bodies of and . denies 's allegations , but the other marines are quickly convinced by 's story . As they debate what they should do with and are about to waste him , the power to the facility is suddenly cut off . Hicks has and walk perimeter . They use motion trackers and register movement coming towards them , already inside the perimeter , and reports " there 's movement all over the place" . Everyone pulls back in the central room , but the signal keeps approaching , even inside the barricades . They suddenly realize that they have blocked the direct access routes , but forgotten the less obvious ways in ; looks up and opens a ceiling panel , and sees that an army of has simply circumvented the barricades by climbing upside - down through the crawlspaces over the ceiling . They open fire , and hoards of break through the ceiling . As the remaining marines take on the creatures , slips away and prevents the rest from escaping by sealing the med lab door . puts up a brave fight , gunning down several , but he is ambushed by several Aliens coming up from the floor grid , who grab and pull him down out of sight . is killed by an that has already found a way inside the med - lab . finds an alternate escape through the air ducts . reports that the ship is on it 's way , 16 minutes . Inside the vent , is last and fires all her grenades and pulse rifle ammunition , and draws her handgun , then is attacked by an coming down through a vertical duct . She empties her handgun into it and kills it but the spilling acidic blood of the creature seriously wounds her leg . comes to help her , but they suddenly find themselves surrounded by . Once 's handgun is also empty , he triggers a grenade , killing himself and and destroying around them . The explosion causes to fall through a ventilation shaft that leads to the bottom of the facility . and take the stairs to the basement , following the tracker signal . They find , still clutching her doll 's head , in a sewer below a grid , which tries to cut open , but is snatched by an before they can rescue her . screams in desperation when she sees the doll 's head floating in the water , but remains determined to rescue , knowing the will cocoon her to await a facehugger . and rush into an elevator to go up . The doors do n't close until they pound on the buttons a second time , and an jumps in before the doors close . Hicks kills the creature , but is severely wounded by the 's spilling blood , which quickly eats through his body armor . drags out through the complex main doors and they meet up on the surface with , who has just piloted the rescue ship to the surface by remote . However , refuses to leave the planet and demands that take her back to the atmosphere processor to rescue . reluctantly flies the dropship into the atmosphere processor , which is now beginning to overload , and lands on a high platform . Ripley arms herself with a pulse rifle , a flamethrower , and the locator duct - taped together , plus grenades and M-94 marking flares , ignoring 's warnings that the explosion will occur in 19 minutes , leaving a cloud of vapor the size of . She says goodbye to the wounded , who , as a sign of trust , tells her his name is ; tells him her name is Ellen . She tells , who has been treating his injuries , not to let leave , and he confirms that they ai n't goin' anywhere . takes an elevator down , loads the grenade launcher , and stuffs some flares in her pocket . An announcement declares that there are now 14 minutes remaining to reach minimum safe distance . She stalks through the basement , blasting her flamethrower , and leaves signal flares on the floor for backtracking as she infiltrates the hive . She uses the locator signal to find , but only finds the detached wristpiece . She collapses to the floor , stricken with grief , but hears scream : the girl has been cocooned and is threatened by a facehugger hatching from an egg . kills the creature , which alerts warrior to her presence . The attacking warriors are quickly gunned down by and she frees from the cocoon - wall . Several explosions from the failing reactor drive , carrying , into a chamber full of eggs . It also houses a monstrously large : the of the hive , still laying eggs . Several warrior Aliens close in on them , but when threatens to destroy the eggs , the signals them to retreat . and slowly back out of the egg chamber , planning to leave the Queen and eggs to be destroyed in the imminent nuclear explosion , but when an egg hatches next to , she can stand it no longer . She turns the flamethrower on the eggs , spraying the room with napalm . The goes mad , screeching insanely at the destruction of her offspring . then fires a series of bullets and grenades into the eggs , several warrior and the 's egg - sac , blowing it to bits . As she and retreat out of the chamber , a warrior ambushes them , but it is quickly gunned down . throws her grenade belt into the raging inferno , and then retreats towards the elevator . The exploding grenades destroy the remaining eggs , but also dislodge the from her perch . The queen tears herself free from the egg - sac and furiously pursues and , who make it back to the elevator , then have to wait for it to return . There are four minutes remaining to reach minimum safe distance . As they retreat into the elevator they are approached by the , and uses the remaining napalm in the flamethrower on the Queen , burning her severely as the elevator carries them up . However , the second elevator opens up in front of the , who tilts her head while looking at it . As they arrive on the platform with two minutes remaining , to 's desperation , the dropship is not there . She curses . 's ammunition counter reads zero . While the surrounding complex is quickly exploding and collapsing , the other elevator arrives , its door opens , and the emerges . tells to close here eyes , possibly intending to leap to their deaths rather than let the Queen kill them . Just then the dropship comes hovering over the platform . and are narrowly able to get on safely and on time . The dropship carrying , , and barely escapes as the processing facility explodes in a massive mushroom cloud below them . Back on the , says he had to sedate for the pain , but that he would be all right . He explains that he had to take off from the platform , which became unstable , and had to circle while waiting to pick them up . makes peace with , thanking him for saving their lives . Suddenly , is speared from behind by a huge stinger , and ripped in half at the waist by the : she had stowed away by hiding inside the recess for the landing gear . She advances menacingly towards and . attracts the 's attention and tells to run . dives under the flooring as continues to call the Queen , then runs and quickly closes a door behind her . The batters the door , then searches the floor and starts ripping the floor plates up until she has the child cornered . screams like a high - pitched siren . Suddenly , appears , inside the large forklift power loader she used earlier . The - like machine makes her an even match for the giant , and they battle furiously . punches the Queen several times , grabs her and attempts to dump her into the ship 's airlock , but the quickly grabs hold of the power loader , and gets dragged down into the airlock with her . Ripley manages to get out and climb up the ladder , as the grabs her leg . activates the controls , opening the outer lock door , causing air to rush out of the ship . is in bad shape but his head and upper torso are still functioning , white hydraulic fluid everywhere , and as what 's left of him slides towards the airlock he grabs on to the floor grill to hold himself in place . The desperately tries to hold onto 's foot , but her shoe comes off and the is blown out into space , screaming and flailing madly . As is also being blown towards the airlock , grabs her and anchors them both in place . somehow manages to pull herself up out of the airlock against the enormous air pressure , and closes the airlock , barely pulling her leg out in time . comes up to her and hugs her , calling her " mommy " . congratulates her : " Not bad for a human " , as and . The film ends as prepares , , and what 's left of for hypersleep for the journey back to . She assures she can sleep all the way home , and that they both can dream . They are both in deep sleep as the ending credits roll . After the ending credits , the sound of the howling wind and a scurrying facehugger are heard.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > This animated film starts with ( voice of ) introducing himself as we know him , the friendly neighborhood - . By now , everybody knows how big he is , what with saving constantly , getting his own comics , cereal , and even a album . He does have some things he 's not proud of ( the emo dance , for one ) , but he takes his duties as proudly , as he is the one and only . We meet teen ( voice of ) as he is getting ready to start attending a private school . He lives with his father ( voice of ) and his mother ( voice of ) . Miles goes around his neighborhood greeting his friends and tagging street signs with stickers he made . , a cop , catches and escorts him to school in his cruiser . As they ride to the school , they see a news report on - , whom is not a fan of . Once they arrive , tells he loves him , but fails to say it back . then uses his radio to force in front of all the other students to say " I love you " back , embarrassing him . Miles gets into his schoolwork as he tries to adjust to this new environment . During one of his classes , he meets ( voice of ) , who does n't immediately tell him who she is . Later , sneaks out of his dorm to visit his ( voice of ) , who is 's brother and a sort of black sheep due to his criminal activities . Miles tells him about , and tells him to do a shoulder touch to try and charm her . The two then go to the tunnels near the subway so that they can do some graffiti since is fond of 's artwork . As spray - paints the walls , a radioactive glitching spider crawls up his leg and bites his hand after takes a picture of his work , but he only lightly taps the spider off his hand before leaving with . The next day , finds himself feeling differently . He hears a voice in his head ( which is accompanied by comics - style text boxes ) , his clothes barely fit , and he is sweating profusely . He runs into , who tries to make up a fake name when they properly introduce themselves . Miles tries to do the shoulder touch , but he only gets his hand stuck on 's shoulder , and then her hair , leading them to have to go to the nurse for her to cut her hair off . When tries going back to his room , he is found by a security guard who calls him out for leaving his dorm . Miles runs and hides in the man 's office , getting everything stuck to him as he keeps freaking out . He climbs out the window and finds himself walking on the walls before running into the streets , amazed by his newfound powers and abilities . Miles later goes to the tunnel where the spider bit him . As he examines it , it starts glitching again . Not long after , hides as his spider - sense detects danger . - enters as he 's being pursued by the ( voice of ) . The fight takes them beneath where / ( voice of ) is attempting to start up a . In the middle of fighting , he takes the time to get out of harm 's way . realizes is just like him , just as the machine is turned on . Outside in the city , certain structures start to get weirdly morphed into other shapes . A blast occurs in the tunnel . is badly injured , and tries to help him , but tells him to hide before giving him a drive to shut down the . , , and another villain , The , gather around and remove his mask . He begs not to restart the , even telling him to think about his family , but this angers and he kills - by slamming his fists down onto him , which watches in horror . He runs back home where his parents find him , and he runs to . The news breaks out that - is dead , and that he was . everywhere are devastated . Miles buys a costume ( the store owner is the voice of , no less ) before attending a memorial service for , with many other fans attending dressed as the wall - crawler . ( voice of ) delivers a eulogy for her husband while ( voice of ) stands solemnly in the back . Miles is inspired by 's words to take up the mantle of - . He wants to test out his powers , but he is n't quite sure of how to get them to work . He later pays a visit to 's grave , just as he is spotted by another man ... ( ) . In his own words , this tells us that in his universe , he 's been - for years and is now an adult , but he 's lost and he was married to but is now divorced due to him not being able to work out his issues as , as well as him not wanting kids when she did . He became depressed and gained weight , and then the Collider turned on , which pulled him into this dimension . Now after finding , he gets knocked unconscious , leading Miles to try and swing away with him as the police go after them , only to end up crashing on the streets as people walk past them . Miles brings somewhere for safety . He questions as to how it 's possible that he 's there alive when he correctly guesses the alternate dimension theory . Miles takes out the drive that the of his universe gave him ( which other calls a " goober " ) , but it 's broken . frees himself and takes the broken goober to try and find a new one so that he can get back home , as being in this dimension causes him to glitch and be unstable . However , before can head off on his own , guilts him into letting him join so that they can make things right together . and , dressed in their costumes , go to where the data on the is being kept . As they try to find a way to sneak in , and his henchman ( ) and his top scientist ( voice of ) . 's motive for operating the is to be reunited with his wife ( voice of ) and son . Years earlier , they watched as he tried to kill - , and they fled from him , only to be tragically hit by a truck . Miles and manage to sneak into the lab and find the room with the computer . Miles starts freaking out again as he ca n't unstick himself from the ceiling , just as and his scientist are outside . Miles then also finds out he can turn invisible while he 's scared . The scientist then enters the room , forcing to try and charm her . She is impressed to find - alive , but only so she can kill him herself . She then reveals her name to be , aka . She reveals her mechanical tentacles as she attacks , but grabs the computer so that they can go . They are chased by scientists out of the lab and into the woods . The guys swing through the trees as the villains catch up , but gets webbed up by a third spider - person ... GWEN . She tells and how she too has come from another dimension where she was bitten by a spider . There , she saved her father 's life but could n't save . The three of them then head out of the woods to get away . later goes back to , who is highly displeased to find there are two more Spider - around . , , and to go 's home , where she is able to figure out that the she sees before her is from another dimension . She takes them to her 's old secret hideout , which is full of different suits , gadgets , and vehicles . There , the three meet - ( voice of ) , a black - and - white old - gangster - talking hero ; ( voice of ) and her robot , which is powered by a radioactive spider ; and , aka - ( voice of ) , who was actually a spider bitten by a radioactive pig . All of them were pulled from their own dimensions and into 's world . They each plan to stay behind and shut down the Collider with a new goober so that the rest can get home , but says it has to be him since this is his dimension . When tries to back him up by stating the cool powers that has , he is unable to turn them on and prove to the others that he is capable of helping . Miles turns invisible and he dejectedly leaves the cave . Miles goes to 's home for help , just as and are contacting since they have n't heard from in a while . finds 's apartment empty , but then encounters inside , prompting him to go invisible again . speaks to and removes his mask , revealing himself to be . is horrified . He tries to get out of the apartment but is chased by throughout the city until he manages to evade him . Back at 's house , reunites with the other - to tell them that his uncle is working for . Unfortunately , has led there , along with , , , and Scorpion ( voice of ) . The villains attack , and the - People spring into action . Even gets in on it by defending her home . goes after and chases him to the rooftop . Kingpin orders to finish off , until takes off his mask to reveal himself to his uncle . is mortified that he almost killed his nephew . As he backs down , shoots in the back and then goes for , but he swings out of there with his uncle . He takes to an alley where he is dying . blames himself for what happened , but encourages him to keep pushing forward . finds over 's body , sending Miles fleeing . then sees his brother and breaks down . Miles returns to his dorm where the other - People meet up with him . They cause his roommate to pass out from seeing them crawl up the wall . webs Miles up to his chair and takes the goober to go stop the Collider , telling it 's for his safety . After they leave , comes up to 's dorm outside , but he ca n't respond thanks to the web . tells him about and only wishes for to be okay . Miles then musters up the strength to bring out his power to free himself . Miles goes back to 's and gets the original - suit , which he spray paints with dark colors . He then tests his powers more confidently as he swings around the city . The other - People find 's gala where they are able to sneak in because the staff are wearing masks . sees and tried to express his guilt toward leaving her , even though she does n't know it 's him or what he 's talking about . They proceed down to where the is , but 's henchmen find them and proceed to attack . Miles swings in and joins his comrades as they fight back . To make things worse , the is activated , causing another earthquake across the city as dimensions start warping together . Spider - takes on while and fight , and - beats up Scorpion with a cartoon mallet . goes after and while tries to shut the down . The henchmen are taken out , and is plowed by an inter - dimensional truck . Unfortunately , is heavily damaged , leaving devastated as and - comfort her . She takes the spider back as they prepare to jump back home . They say their farewells , and goes first , followed by and - . affirms her friendship with before going home . tried to stay back and help , but chooses to send back so that he can fix what he has to do in his world . Miles then goes after the Collider , but starts hitting back hard . He then starts to see a new and as their dimensions start crossing over . Just as seems to overpower , he sees as he enters the area . Miles gets himself up and uses his power to blast away and then send him webbed up toward the button to shut down the for good . Outside , calls to let him know he 's okay . He then approaches him as - and hugs him , letting him know he 's doing a good job , but not letting his dad know who he really is . then finds webbed up and prepped for arrest . Miles now assumes his regular school duties while also taking on his role as the new - , earning a number of new fans across the city . Meanwhile , in 's dimension , he heads off to patch things up with . As settles in his room for a nap , a dimensional portal opens and he hears 's voice calling to him . There is a dedication for and . After the closing credits , there is a scene where / - 2099 ( voice of ) learns about the other - from his assistant ( voice of ) . He travels to 67 where he ends up in a weird pointing argument with the - from the 1960s > 

 < synopsis > ( ) is a 42 - year - old father , husband and advertising executive who serves as the film 's narrator . 's relationship with his wife ( ) , a materialistic and ambitious realtor who feels that she is unsuccessful at fulfilling her potential , is strained . His 16 - year - old daughter ( ) is unhappy and struggling with self - esteem issues . himself is a self - described loser : boring , faceless and easy to forget . is reinvigorated , however , when he meets 's friend and classmate , the egotistical ( ) at a high school basketball game . immediately develops an obvious infatuation with , much to his daughter 's embarrassment . Throughout the film , has fantasies involving a sexually aggressive and rose petals . The ' new neighbors are , ( ) , his distracted wife ( ) , and his camcorder - obsessed and marijuana - selling son ( ) . When confronted with the gay couple living two doors down , displays a distinctly bigoted attitude . Over the course of a few days , each of the individually makes a life - changing choice . meets real estate rival ( ) for a business lunch and ends up beginning an affair with him , and later takes up shooting lessons ( a suggestion of 's ) . blackmails his boss ( ) for $ 60,000 , quits his job , and takes up low - pressure employment as a burger - flipper at a fast food chain . He continues to liberate himself by trading in his for his dream car , a 1970 , starts working out to impress , and starts smoking a genetically - enhanced form of supplied to him by . , while growing distant from , develops a romantic relationship with , having bonded over what he considers to be his most beautiful camcorder footage he has ever filmed , that of a plastic grocery bag dancing in the wind . The two begin a sexual relationship . One night after sex , while records her , talks to about how unsatisfying her life is and how indifferent her parents seem toward her and each other . seems to have more complaints about her father , especially his attraction to and that someone should kill him to put him out of his misery . asks her if she 'd like him to kill for her . She coldly replies that she would . , concerned over the growing relationship between and , roots through his son 's possessions , finding footage of working out in the nude ( captured by chance while was filming through her bedroom window)- slowly bringing him to the incorrect conclusion that his son is gay . and are found out by , who seems to be mostly unfazed by his wife 's infidelity . , who is almost more devastated by 's indifference than by her being exposed as an adulteress , is further dismayed when reacts by breaking off the affair . As evening falls , returns home to find his father waiting for him with fists and vitriol , having mistaken his drug rendezvous with for a sexual affair . Realizing this as an opportunity for freedom , falsely agrees that he is gay and goads his violent father until he is thrown out . rushes to 's house and asks her to flee with him to - something she agrees to , much to the dismay of , who quickly protests . shoots her down with her deepest fear : that she is boring and completely ordinary and uses her " friends " , like , to boost her public image . Broken and dismayed , storms out of the room , leaving and to reconcile . finds an emotionally fragile standing outside in the pouring rain and attempts to comfort him , but is taken by surprise when kisses him . gently rebuffs him , telling him he has the wrong idea . , shamed and broken , wanders back into the rain . Meanwhile , sits alone in her car on the side of the road , holding her gun and becoming more and more infuriated at the day 's turn of events . Moments later , finds a distraught and is on the edge of consummating their relationship sexually , but the seduction is derailed when she confesses that she is a virgin . Now viewing her only as an innocent child , immediately withdraws , his affections shifting to that of a father - figure , and they bond over their shared frustrations with and concern for , seeming to be pleased when confesses that 's in love . asks how he 's feeling and he realizes , to his own surprise , that he feels great . After excuses herself to the bathroom , a happy sits at the table looking at a photograph of his family in happier times , unaware of the gun being held to the back of his head . A gunshot rings out ; hears it in the bathroom . is found by and . stares directly into 's eyes , seemingly fascinated with his corpse , before he and the crying leave . finds dead and goes immediately to his closet , wailing over his things . In his final narration , looks back on the events of his life , intertwined with images of everyone 's reactions to the sound of the subsequent gunshot , including one of a bloody and shaken with a gun missing from his collection . Despite his death , , from his vantage point as narrator , is content:"I guess I could be really pissed off about what happened to me ... but it 's hard to stay mad , when there 's so much beauty in the world . Sometimes I feel like I 'm seeing it all at once , and it 's too much , my heart fills up like a balloon that 's about to burst ... and then I remember to relax , and stop trying to hold on to it , and then it flows through me like rain . And I ca n't feel anything but gratitude for every single moment of my stupid little life . You have no idea what I 'm talking about , I 'm sure . But do n't worry ... you will someday . "</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > At the somewhere in the , the eccentric ( ) orders the 34 nuclear - armed 's of the past their failsafe points where they normally hold awaiting possible orders to proceed and into Soviet airspace . He also tells the personnel on the base that the and the have entered into a " shooting war" . In the " " at The , ( ) briefs ( ) about the attack that ordered . Although a nuclear attack should require Presidential authority to be initiated , used " Plan R " , an emergency war plan enabling a senior officer to launch a retaliation strike against the if everyone in the normal chain of command , including the , has been killed during a sneak attack . was intended to discourage the from launching a decapitation strike against the in to disrupt command and control and stop an American nuclear counterattack . tries to convince to take advantage of the situation to eliminate the as a threat by launching a full - scale attack . believes that the is in a superior strategic position , and a first strike against the would destroy 90 % of their missiles before they could retaliate , resulting in a victory for the with " acceptable " American casualties of " no more than 10 to 20 million killed , tops ... depending on the breaks " . He is rebuked when instead admits the ( ) to the , contacts on the hotline , and insists on giving the Soviets all the information necessary to shoot down the American planes before they can carry out their strikes . ( also played by ) , an exchange officer serving as 's executive officer , realizes that there has been no attack on the when he turns on a radio and hears pop music instead of alerts . When reveals this to , and refuses to recall the wing , announces that he will issue the recall on his own authority , but only knows the three - letter code necessary for recalling the bombers and locks the two of them in his office . tries to convince to give up the three letter code . The psychotic refuses and rambles on that the have a plan to " sap and impurify " the " precious bodily fluids " of the American people with fluoridated water , a theory that occurred to him during sexual intercourse , and which he believed to be the cause of his post - coital fatigue . Over the phone , an unseen and drunken reveals to the Soviet that their country has installed an active " " which will automatically destroy all human and animal life on if a nuclear attack were to hit the . The is operated by a network of computers and has been conceived as the ultimate deterrent : as a safeguard , it can not be deactivated , or it will set itself off , because its hardware and programs have been configured in such a way that an attempt at its deactivation would be recognized as sabotage . The doomsday weapon is described as based on " cobalt - thorium - G " [ this was inspired by the real idea of a cobalt bomb , conceived by nuclear pioneer , founder of for a ] . According to the Soviet ambassador , life on 's surface will be extinct in ten months and was made as a low cost alternative to the bomb - race . The now calls upon ( a.k.a . ) , a former and strategy expert ( Sellers in his third role ) . The wheelchair - bound is a type of " mad scientist " , whose eccentricities include a severe case of alien hand syndrome , so that his right hand , clad in an ominous black leather glove , occasionally attempts to strangle or make the salute ( no one in the room acts if this is unsusual ) . Strangelove also slips in addressing the , as either " " or even " Fhrer" . explains the principles behind the , which he says is " simple to understand ... credible and convincing " . He also points out that a kept secret has no value as a deterrent ; the Soviet admits that his government had installed it a few days before they were going to announce it publicly to the world , because " loves surprises" . paratroopers sent by the arrive at to arrest . Because has warned his men that the enemy might attack disguised as American soldiers , the base 's security forces , and himself with a .50 caliber machine gun kept in his golf bag , open fire on them . After a fierce firefight the forces win the battle and gain access to the base , and , fearing torture to extract the commits suicide . " " ( ) shoots his way into 's office , but suspects that , whose uniform he does not recognize , is leading a mutiny of " deviated preverts " and proceeds to arrest him . Mandrake convinces that he has to call the to tell him the , which he has deduced from 's desk blotter doodles to be based on the initials for the phrases peace on earth and purity of essence . Since office phone connections had been knocked out by the fighting at the base , is forced to use a pay phone to try to contact the . Not having the correct change to place a long - distance call to the , persuades to shoot a - vending machine to get the change out of it , and eventually is able to forward the likely code combinations to . The correct , " " , is issued to the planes , and those that have not been shot down return to base except for one . Its radio and fuel tanks were damaged by a Soviet anti - aircraft missile , with the result that the plane is neither able to receive the code nor to reach its primary or secondary target where , at the urging of the , the have concentrated all available defenses . On the crew 's own initiative , and losing fuel , the plane proceeds to fly at low level under radar to a closer target of opportunity . As they start their bomb run , the damaged 's bomb bay doors will not open , and aircraft commander " " ( ) goes down to the bomb bay to open them himself . He succeeds just as the plane reaches its target , and one of the nuclear bombs falls , with still sitting on it . He straddles the bomb and rides it to the ground like a rodeo cowboy , whooping and hollering and waving his cowboy hat . The bomb explodes , triggering the . Back in the , recommends to the that a select group of about 200,000 or more people be relocated into a deep mine shaft , where the nuclear fallout can not reach them , so that the can be repopulated afterwards . Because of space limitations , suggests a gender ratio of " ten females to each male " , with the women selected for their sexual characteristics , and the men selected on the basis of their physical strength , intellectual capabilities , and importance in business and government . rants that the will likely create an even better bunker than the , and argues that " must not allow a mine shaft gap " . Meanwhile , the retreats to a corner of the and starts taking pictures with a spy camera disguised as a pocket watch . A visibly excited bolts out of his wheelchair , shouting " , I can walk ! " . Abruptly , the film ends with a barrage of nuclear explosions , accompanied by 's famous song " We 'll Meet > 

 < synopsis > ( ) is delivering a eulogy for at the end of The : " I knew . I was his friend . And it will be a very long time before someone ... inspires us the way he did . I believed in ... "Eight years later , a is driving across a field , occupied by Russian soldiers . They are transporting a nuclear scientist , ( ) . Sitting in the backseats are three prisoners , who are handcuffed , hooded , and have rifles trained on them . The arrives at an airfield , where it meets a jet occupied by a agent , , ( ) and soldiers from an extraction team , whom has cut a deal with . The agent refuses to let the hooded prisoners come on his aircraft . The agent is told by the truck driver , ( ) , that they are mercenaries who work for the masked man . He takes it that the " masked man " is , an infamous terrorist , and brings them on board . During the flight , interrogates the prisoners for information about . He has one prisoner dragged to the cargo door and demands to know who paid the men to kidnap . When the man refuses to talk , pulls his pistol and fires a shot away from the man 's head and pulls the man back inside . The second prisoner is pulled over to the door and given the same treatment . This time , asks him about the mask that wears . The man fails to talk leading to believe he 's " awfully loyal for a hired gun" . At this point , the third prisoner - who sounds like he is talking through a voice amplifier- suggests that his comrade is wondering why would someone " shoot a man before throwing him out of a plane ? " signals for one soldier to seal the door and asks this prisoner for his name . The hooded man says that it does n't matter who he and his comrades are , but it 's their plan that matters . As the man admits that " no one cared who I was ' til I put on the mask " , removes his hood , revealing a bald , muscular brute wearing an intimidating breathing apparatus over his mouth - ( asks if he will die if he takes off the mask , and assures him it would be extremely painful ... for . congratulates for getting himself caught , and asks him what the next step of his master plan is . Bane boldly announces it : crashing the very plane they are on right now .... with no , a team of henchmen fast - rope out of a that has descended over the jet , land on the small plane 's wings , and shoot out the side windows with guns , while breaks his handcuffs and punches . The henchmen attach cables to the plane with hooks behind the wings , and plant bombs in the fuselage . As the plane begins to nosedive , the stress tears the wings off . Two henchmen then climb up and set off charges to blow off the tail section . One soldier draws his pistol and manages to get off one round before he is shot dead by a mercenary descending into the plane . The mercenaries also lower in a body bag containing the corpse of a man who resembles . grabs , and pulls out a small tube with needles on both ends . He inserts one end into 's arm and the other into the corpse , and starts to perform a blood transfer . Bane spots one of his comrades escaping and orders the man to stop , as the authorities expect to find one of them in the wreckage . The man asks if they 've started a fire , and says , " Yes , the fire rises . " attaches the harness to himself and , and tells the doctor that the time to panic will come later . He sets off a detonator , which releases the fuselage . and are then reeled up into the bigger plane . In , the eighth anniversary of 's death is being celebrated as . At a charity event hosted by the forever - absent ( ) , prepares to deliver a speech revealing the truth about and the murders for which the had taken the fall 8 years ago followed by his own resignation as commissioner , but deciding that the time is not right , and having flashbacks of holding his son hostage , he stuffs the speech into his jacket . His ( ) talks with the city 's congressman ( ) , who informs him that with the drop in crime , is a war hero in peacetime , and the mayor plans on dumping him in the spring . ( ) , a wealthy investor , and businessman ( ) try to meet the reclusive to get him to invest in her clean energy project , but are unable to meet him . is curious why is interested in seeing a guy who threw away her investment , but chides him for only understanding money and the power he thinks it buys . One of the maids for the event is ( ) , a young , who breaks into 's room on the pretense of delivering dinner . She cracks his safe , stealing his mother 's pearl necklace , which has a tracking device built into it . She starts looking around the place , observing a photo of 's parents . As she notices a target with several arrows embedded in it , comes in , hobbling on a cane , and announces himself by shooting another arrow into the bullseye , causing to jump . She tries to apologize , and comments that does n't look anything like the rumors make him out to be . immediately notices the necklace and outs her as a thief . Caught , 's tone and attitude change . She points out that would n't beat up a woman so much as she would beat up a cripple .... " of course exceptions have to be made . " She kicks his cane out from under him , spilling him to the floor , then escapes by doing a backflip out of a window . She changes out of her disguise as she makes her way to the 's car and asks for a ride . ( ) comes up to 's room and finds looking at the breached safe . Learning that the intruder was one of the maids , he dryly suggests that stop letting maids into this part of the house . has found print dust and realizes that also took a copy of his fingerprints . Later that night , looks through some files on the police station 's roof , next to the destroyed , when he is approached by rookie officer ( - ) , who informs him about the 's disappearance . Blake reveals that he has suspicions about 's death and the last confirmed sighting , but dismisses him , takes one look at the , and departs . The next morning , finds working on the computers in the . The prints their jewel thief was using were not her own , but rather those of a male armed - robbery suspect . notes that by using the pearls ' tracking device , he was able to get their thief 's address and cross - reference it with police information to produce 's name . is a master jewel thief nicknamed as " the " . She 's been arrested a few times for various crimes like assault , resisting arrest , even breaking out of a women 's correctional facility when she just sixteen years old . suggests that go out with , and move on from the grief he 's had over 's death eight years ago . surprises when informing him that during the seven years before returned to to become , hoped that would never return . He tells that he wished that while in a cafe during his yearly vacation , after had disappeared , he would see happily with a woman , married , having a normal life . They would silently acknowledge each other . Blake and his partner ( ) show up at a sewage treatment plant , where a dead body has washed up out of one of the tunnels . Blake recognizes the body as that of a kid staying at 's orphanage . has a very close relationship with the orphanage and with ( ) , the warden , and we realize that he grew up in that orphanage , which had been funded by the until recently . One of the kids at the orphanage informs him that the sewers provide good employment , which makes suspicious . A few nights later , walks into a bar with a drunk man . She seats him at the counter , then walks over to another table and meets with ( ) , 's assistant CEO . She hands him a slide that contains four of 's right hand fingerprints . When asks if has something in return for her , he signals for one of his men to lock the door . smiles , and admits that although she does n't want to know what is planning to use 's prints for , she knows he 'll need a thumbprint as well . has another hoodlum put a pistol to 's head to threaten her . She hesitates for a moment , but hands her cell phone to and tells him to hit the send button . There is a knock at the door , and 's friend , a young woman named ( ) , comes in . She enters and notices that the place seems a little quiet , but assures her that the place will liven up in a few minutes , and leaves . then hands another envelope containing the thumbprint slide . He draws his pistol , prepared to shoot her , and informs that , even in the black dress she 's decided to wear tonight , she will not be missed by anyone . Unfortunately for , reveals that she has anticipated this , for she says that while that might be true about her , the cops are missing her friend , the drunk , who is , in fact , the missing congressman , and has just accidentally used the congressman 's cell phone to send a message to the police . Suddenly , the room is filled with the sound of police cars screeching to a halt outside . Immediately , the thugs draw their pistols and attacks them , disarming one thug . Outside , a team advances up to the front doors with submachine guns drawn . wrestles with and drags him over the table , knocking him out , while other henchmen escape out through the kitchen . Just then , the officers begin swinging a battering ram at the locked front doors . With seconds to act , grabs 's pistol , inserts a fresh magazine , and shoots one henchman , killing him instantly . pistolwhips , then shoots another thug as he tries to draw his weapon . The team breaches the doors , shooting a third henchman as they enter . promptly screams hysterically , pretending to be a frightened hostage . The officers chase the thugs into the kitchen and out the back door , where the hoodlums open fire on them and a shootout ensues . Amidst the echoes of gunfire , walks over to the congressman , who has taken a bullet in the leg , tells him to apply pressure to his wound , then saunters out the front door , where she immediately runs into , to whom she passes herself off as a bystander . While escapes , makes his way through the bar with his pistol . He heads out back to the alleyway to provide support to the officers , who have been pinned down behind a parked truck . As they break cover and prepare to fire their guns at the henchmen , , stationed on a fire escape , shoots three of them in the back with a sniper rifle . The remaining henchmen sprint for safety , and as they disappear around another corner , and arrive with backup . They enter the alley the henchmen fled into , but find that the men have vanished . While a few officers head up a stairwell to look for the henchmen there , spots a displaced manhole and takes three officers with him to search the tunnel . The four men climb down the ladder into the sewers in pursuit . As they are searching the tunnel , thugs ambush and open fire on them . A bomb goes off , taking out 's backup and shooting a fireball out of the open manhole . mistakes the blast for a gas explosion , but realizes where might turn up and quickly runs to his car . As starts further into the tunnel with his flashlight and pistol drawn , and no backup to help him , two of 's men corner him from behind and knock him out . They grab him by his arms , and drag him , still semi - conscious , through a labyrinth of tunnels . As is dragged deeper in , he notices men with assault rifles and submachine guns overseeing teams of hoodlums doing construction on the walls . The two henchmen bring to an cavern with a waterfall , where they deposit him in front of a shirtless Bane . asks the two henchmen why they thought to bring down here . When the first one says he and his comrade did n't know what to do , tells them that they 've failed in their duties , and their weakness has cost the lives of three people . He immediately the first guy 's neck , then tells the other he will kill him after he searches 's jacket . The second thug empties 's pockets , taking 's badge , wallet , pistol , and 's speech about . looks over 's speech , deciding that it is useful to his plans . sees that his captors are occupied , and when has his back turned , he rolls off the platform into a waterway . 's men open fire on as he floats away , hitting him several times . Barsad hands Bane a tracking device , which he places on the second thug . He then shoots him dead with 's pistol and throws his body into the waterway . Outside the tunnels , jumps out of his car near the sewer outlet , and rushes to the exit grate , where he finds , soaked and barely clinging onto life . After rushing to the hospital , goes to to inform of the shooting , the reason being that he 's figured out himself that is . He explains to that when he was five years old , his mother died in a car accident , and a few years later , his father was shot dead in a gambling dispute . He 's figured out 's identity from the fact that while growing up as an orphan , learned to smile in the mirror to hide his anger . None of 's own cops , not even , believe 's babbling about an underground army , and makes a plea for to return as to stop . As watches drive off , he asks about . Alfred mentions that is a mercenary and it is known that he and his men carried out a coup in a West African country that secured diamond mining operations for . asks why his foundation stopped funding 's orphanage , and reveals that the is funded by profits . Figuring it 's time to talk to , asks for a car and for an appointment at 's hospital for an examination on his leg . He is then seen pulling out of the driveway in his . The orthopedist at the hospital tells that the cartilage in his left knee is gone and combined with the other damage to his body , he can not recommend that go heliskiing . As soon as the doctor leaves the room , dons a ski mask and fast - ropes down to 's hospital room . He finds hooked up to multiple machines . Though barely able to talk , insists that must return to stop . next tracks down to her apartment in a rundown neighborhood , using the tracking device planted in his mother 's necklace . Inside , has put on the necklace and is preparing to go out for a night on the town when she hears a commotion in the hallway . is being threatened by a yuppie she has pickpocketed . defuses the situation by twisting the guy 's hand and forcing him against the wall , in the process stealing his watch . then watches as she emerges and climbs into a cab , and follows her . ends up tailing to a gala costume ball . As he leaves his car with the valet , the paparazzi recognize him and start to snap photos of him , but uses a remote in his pocket that shuts down everyone 's cameras , then is waved through by the greeter . Inside , watches as she is dancing with an older man . She is wearing a domino mask and a headband with a set of cat ears . As he watches her , he is approached by , the party organizer . She is astonished to see him , since rarely ever came to charity events even before he retired from his role as . They make some small - talk about the energy project , and then departs , leaving free to track down . cuts in with 's dancing partner as the next routine begins . She is annoyed that he came . As they slowly waltz , reveals her desire to get a fresh start , and claims she wants to see the rich lose and the city burn . tells her that all of her assumptions of him are wrong . tells him that there 's a storm coming , having some knowledge of 's plans , and that she 's adaptable . Although he admits that his mother 's necklace looks better on than locked in a safe , he does n't believe she deserves it , and he removes them from her neck . responds to this by suddenly planting a passionate kiss on him , in the process pickpocketing his valet ticket , and then leaves . then finds out the hard way that she has stolen his car by pretending to be his wife . goes to his company offices the next day to meet with ( ) , who assures him that his majority ownership of keeps from taking over the company despite him blowing the department 's budget on the mothballed nuclear project . He takes down to the department and shows him a new toy - a sleek flying aircraft . It is a army project designed for urban combat , with rotors that make it capable of navigating between buildings without recirculation . The project , which has a long project designation , is one that simply nicknames " the " , and that yes , it does come in black . The currently works fine , although warns that the broken autopilot could be repaired with someone of 's intellect . To get back into physical shape , straps on motorized leg braces and does basic martial arts in the . walks in while is practicing a roundhouse kick , and tells that he needs to know about rumors that surround . Supposedly , escaped from a middle - eastern prison known for brutality and simply called the " of . " then became a member of the of , and was trained by 's - . was excommunicated from the group for extreme behavior beyond the boundaries of the . warns that anyone too extreme for the likes of 's - is not to be trifled with . He believes has a death wish to go back to being . That evening , and three of his men carry out an assault and robbery on the . One henchman , , ( ) enters the building by posing as a shoeshiner , working at a stand by an entrance to the trading floor , stashing a submachine gun in his gym bag . A second unnamed henchman ( ) enters disguised as a janitor , and pretends to mop the floor in the front stairwell , hiding a submachine gun in his water bucket . A third henchman , , sneaks onto the trading floor by posing as a sandwich delivery man . Prior to closing time , and the janitor drop what they are doing , wait until there is no one around to see them , then draw their weapons and make their way to the trading floor . At the same time , arrives at the rear entrance disguised as a deliveryman , and wearing a motorcycle helmet to hide his face . When he walks through the metal detector , an alarm goes off . A female security guard stops and orders him to take off his helmet so their cameras can see his face . He removes his helmet , revealing his gas mask . Before the guards can react , lashes out with lethal blows , punching the female guard with his helmet . He knocks out a second guard . A third guard tries to draw his gun , but twists his gun hand , punches him in the crotch with his other hand , shoots a fourth guard , and lastly fracture 's the third guard 's skull . Upstairs , as and the janitor walk into the trading floor , suddenly draws a pistol from a paper bag , whips his customer over the shoulder with the barrel , and shoots a nearby trader . McGarrity and the janitor raise their submachine guns and open fire , sending traders diving for cover . The three henchmen cease shooting as strides onto the floor . He looks around , and notices a trader who we just saw getting his shoes shined by moments earlier . As the trader protests that there is no money for to steal , drags the man by his necktie over to another terminal , and slams his head against the table , knocking him out . McGarrity pulls a laptop out of his bag and uses a USB cable to hook it into the computer terminal . Bane uses the trader 's security card to log in to the system , and a series of trades begin running across the screen . The police , including and several teams , arrive outside the exchange in full force . The security chief at the exchange is worried as has access to everyone 's financial assets . refuses to risk endangering hostages . He orders the fiber line and cell tower shut down in an attempt to stall . Inside , is not alarmed when reports this to him . While is dealing with the stock exchange 's security chief , arrives , climbs out of his car , and notices a cement mixer truck parked on the nearby corner , obstructing the street . He walks over and tells the driver to move his truck . There is a short argument as the driver insists he has nowhere to move . tells him to back his truck up . Suddenly , an alarm goes off , and a barrier ramp is raised at the end of the block to keep the robbers from leaving the street . Blake orders the driver to stay in his truck and rushes off . Inside the exchange , asks for a progress report . McGarrity reports that they need eight more minutes to complete the program . Bane looks at the clock and says that they are leaving . The janitor orders everyone to stand , raises his submachine gun and fires into the ceiling , sending hostages scrambling to their feet . McGarrity stuffs his tablet into his bag , while grabs his helmet and starts for the exit . The officers aim their pistols and rifles at the front doors as the hostages begin to exit the building with their hands raised over their heads . A sniper stationed on a rooftop across the street notices a couple of bright headlights inside the lobby . Before he can register what they are , the crowd dives for cover as bursts out of the building riding a motorcycle , followed by , , and the janitor . Each robber is carrying a hostage , strapped to the back of his motorcycle . yells for the officers to hold their fire . Bane and his men weave through the police cars , speed past and the cement truck , use the crash barriers as ramps to jump over a few police cars , and escape . As they pass the cement truck and 's position , and the janitor throw their hostages off . shouts orders , and officers jump into the cars and speed away , tires screeching , as they give chase . Bane and his men race through the streets . As they enter a tunnel , a single police car , driven by rookie officer ( ) and his veteran partner ( ) catches on to them . tells , riding shotgun , to shoot the tires , but does n't have a clean shot . orders them over the radio to drop back to avoid endangering the hostages . Suddenly , notices the tunnel lights behind them going out by themselves . The tunnel goes dark , and the police car 's engine and battery suddenly cut off for a few seconds . Something sleek and black races past their car and tells his partner , " Oh boy ! You are in for a show tonight , son . " Seconds later , 's motorcycle suddenly sputters out . As comes to a stop , his hostage makes a break for it . aims his pistol , preparing to shoot the hostage , when slams into him , knocking off his bike . He then climbs back on the , aims an EMP gun , and shorts out the janitor 's motorcycle , bringing him to a stop . Just then , shoots 's weapon . apologizes before his partner orders him back in the car . Receiving word of the 's return , jumps into 's cruiser , and they drive off to join the chase . As they drive , orders every unit brought in , eager to take down , even though believes they should be focusing on stopping from escaping . While the car chase unfolds , breaks into 's safe looking for the software program , which has the potential to expunge her criminal record . She is using special safecracking goggles that flip up and look like cat ears when she is not using them . When she opens the safe , she is enraged to find that it is empty . As chases and on the , notices that the laptop application is 91 % complete . With the cops closing in , signals to McGarrity , then makes a tight u - turn . A pursuing officer reports this to over the radio , but orders the officers to let go and instead stay on 's trail . As a result , is able to race through the police cars without any of them trying to intercept him , doing a second glance over his shoulder as he passes . Once at a safe spot , he watches the chase for a few moments to make sure no one has seen him , then rides into a storm drain to head back to his hideout . rescues 's hostage and uses his bike to block the mercenary near a highway on - ramp . steps up to McGarrity , shatters his visor with his fist , and looks at the laptop , which now reads " application complete . " As the police surround him , grabs the laptop hard drive , then sets off an explosion with the cannons and jumps off of a stopped auto carrier . After another harrowing chase , the police box him in , and turns into an alleyway . It appears that has been cornered " like a rat in a trap , " but as prepares to speak into a megaphone , a blue light and odd humming noise appears at the end of the alleyway , and tells he 's got the wrong animal . The emerges , and flies out and over the police officers , its downdraft pinning the cops down . casually asks if he 's sure that was who just flew off . Furious , shoves the megaphone into 's hand . At 's penthouse , reports to that the robbery was successful even with 's interference , and has assured him the men who were captured will die before talking . tells a servant to open champagne and heads to his office . As he enters the office , he asks " Can we get some girls in here ? " A voice promptly says , " Careful what you wish for , " at which point suddenly appears , attacks from behind , throws him across the room and pins him to the wall with her left boot restraining his right arm and her hand grasping his neck . She demands to know where the program is . comes in and puts a pistol to the back of 's head , but she disarms him by stomping her serrated heel on his instep . One of 's bodyguards bursts in . holds him off by aiming her pistol at the bodyguard while collaring . She shoots out the window , and jumps onto a window - washing platform with , which she lowers to the ground . On the nearby rooftop , pins down , and jams 's pistol into his neck , trying to get him to talk . admits that he lied about the , which he considered a " gangland myth " . As tries to control herself and takes this in , 's men surround her . She grabs and tries using him as a human shield to warn the henchmen to back off , but they ignore her . appears , and he and attack the mercenaries , disarming several of them . is annoyed when disarms her of her pistol when she 's about to shoot a henchman . Suddenly , and some other mercenaries appear and open fire on them , forcing and to run towards the edge of the roof . jumps off the roof and into the , parked below the roof ledge . hesitates for a moment , but makes the jump when she sees approaching her . Bane can only watch as the flies away . Batman deposits on a rooftop . She is annoyed that he tried to interfere , not even so much as giving a " thank you " to him . manages to figure out what she did with his fingerprints and learns that was interested in the exchange robbery . However , before can find out more , he is forced to duck as the spotlight of a police helicopter flying by shines over the roof . When he looks back up , has vanished . " So that 's what it feels like , " he says to himself . Returning to the , asks to have decode the hard drive and also notices his thumbprint scan is on the application . His decision to return as leads to a spat with , who is afraid he has a death wish . leaves and the mansion for good after revealing the contents of 's farewell letter to , given to prior to her death at the 's hands in The . had burned the letter to protect from pain , since before her death chose over as her lover . The next morning , learns from that in the course of the robbery , made stock trades to bankrupt , meaning is about to fall into 's hands . To protect one secret , and show the fusion reactor . and intend to use it for generating clean energy for the entire city , although is afraid of the chance that someone will turn the reactor into a nuclear weapon , as managed to discover . None of them are aware that has in fact kidnapped for this purpose . The reactor is hidden in a chamber underneath the river so that it can be flooded for containment in emergencies . wants to become acting CEO of to safeguard the reactor . is later booted out of a board meeting at 's behest . As he leaves the building , he finds his car being towed . Blake shows up and offers a ride . is not happy that was appointed to the board , and when he returns to his apartment , he demands to see . Stryver hesitates , but suddenly appears behind . turns his anger on , not happy that 's attack on the stock exchange did n't help take over , and furthermore , is not happy about the fact that also has been working 's construction crews around the clock all across the city for unknown purposes . Bane dismisses , calmly and casually revealing that the small fortune paid him does not give him complete power over him , and it was only for the construction machinery that he required to build the sophisticated underground sewers and accomplish his own future plans that he complied with 's orders , which render him 's reckoning . calls pure evil , but replies that he is " necessary evil " and he breaks 's neck . He then has the body thrown in a dumpster . Blake shows up at the hospital while is talking to , to report the discovery of 's body . He has files that show 's name all over construction permits for underground digging across the city , which make him suspect that was somehow associated with . still is skeptical of 's existence , but , impressed with 's honesty and hard work , promotes him to detective , telling him he 's not allowed to believe in coincidences anymore . finds at her apartment and says his powerful friend needs her help . He says he knows about the program and he has it . says she 'll think about it . She apologizes to about him losing all of his money in 's attack . When arrives home in a cab , he finds there . finds he does n't have any keys , so they break into the house through a window . 's electricity is off , as he ca n't afford it anymore . As they sleep together , talks about how fire made her family feel rich when they were growing up . notices a scar on her shoulder , which she calls a mistake . While is sleeping , sneaks down to the , puts on his , and goes to meet with , who says that was n't lying about his powerful friend . They take out a couple of mercenaries on the way . As steps onto a catwalk , a grate slams shut , and admits that she turned him over to keep 's men from killing her . is telling her she 's made a mistake when appears behind him . is n't surprised when reveals that he knows that it 's underneath the mask , knowing 's identity through the of . Although he was excommunicated before 's arrival and training , claims that now , he is * the of , and must have had the information of 's alter reported to him through one of the members of the who survived the assault on in . also claims he 's in to fulfill 's - 's destiny of destroying the city . A lengthy battle of hand - to - hand combat between the two ensues . appears to be more aggressive and offensive than his usual sense , knowing the strength of his opponent . Bane begins to defeat , who tries several diversions , like flashbangs and disabling the lights , but these prove useless against a trained of member like , who mocks his tactics . Bane beats into submission , breaking his cowl with a few blows to his head . As lies prone , reveals where he has established his base . One of his men hands him a detonator , and upon pressing it , explosions go off and a falls through the ceiling , revealing that has set up his base underneath ' office . is 's most formidable enemy because he targets directly and uses 's resources against the city of . As henchmen climb up ropes to raid and capture 's armory , engages again , but is beaten down again . Bane lifts over his head and brings him down brutally on his knee , breaking his back . Bane tears off the broken section of 's cowl and drops it , victorious . , shocked that she just sent to his doom , slinks off as mercenaries grab and drag him away . The scene cuts to the next morning . Blake knocks on 's front door , looking for , but finding no one home , he goes into the city , and while sitting his car , he spots getting into a cab . Recognizing her from the shootout at the bar , he tails her to the airport . Noticing the increased police presence , she ducks into an off - limits area . A uniformed officer spots her and asks to see her boarding pass . hands the cop her hat and pretends to check her purse , then punches him . As she is walking down the jet bridge , comes out of a door in front of her , flashing his badge . Blake talks to in an airport office , asking her why she 's trying to run . He is able to determine that she 's trying to escape from . says she 's not sure if is alive , given what she saw of his fight with . She is then arrested , and placed in prison . Meanwhile , wakes up in a foreign prison , still in pain from the fight . As he is regaining consciousness , he sees standing over him . The prison sits at the bottom of a deep circular shaft , with the only way in or out being by climbing the stone walls . When asks why he did not just kill him , taunts that he intends to kill his soul first , making him witness 's downfall . Bane promises that he 'll live at least long enough to see destroyed , and that only when he is done , and is ashes , will he give permission to die . The prison is where claims to have been born , and it is notorious as a " on " , from which nobody has managed to escape . However , one of the prisoners ( ) tells that a child had managed to escape . The child was born of a mercenary , who fell in love with a 's daughter . The mercenary was sentenced to life in the prison , but the daughter made a deal with her father to free him and instead ended up a prisoner there herself . One day a riot broke out in the prison . She was raped and murdered , but her child escaped . concludes that the child must have been Bane . While in his cell , sees several prisoners attempt to escape by using a rope , and climbing up the shaft towards the light , but fail to clear the final jump on to a ledge required to escape , instead falling and being slung into the brick walls on the sides of the shaft , severely wounding them . Back in , and arrive at for a board meeting on the reactor project . They enter the board room .... to find and his men holding the board of directors hostage . welcomes and asks him to nominate another board member to come with him . Fredericks , another board member , volunteers before can name a nominee . and his men take , and down through the hole in . As he is led along , is horrified watching henchmen fixing parts on the . is talking with at the hospital about 's disappearance when bursts in and informs him of 's latest move . This is the last straw for . He immediately orders to send every available cop to search the sewers to smoke out and his men , on ( at 's suggestion ) the pretense that they 're performing a ' training exercise ' ( so as to avoid causing panic ) . apologizes to for not taking him seriously earlier , and departs . Blake prepares to leave with , but holds him back and orders him to look up 's leads instead . oversees the operation from outside a subway tunnel portal , and watches as officers of every rank walk into the tunnel , not knowing that it will be a long time before they will see daylight again . Elsewhere , teams assemble at subway stations , sewer portals , manhole covers , and drainage pipes and descend into the tunnels , searching for and his men . Bane and his men lead , , and Fredericks into a tunnel , where and notice . They arrive at a dead end where henchmen plant explosive charges into a wall . gives a nod , and all of the henchmen cover their ears as the wall is blasted , clearing a path into the reactor chamber . The explosion echoes through the underground tunnel network , audible to cops searching tunnels elsewhere in the city . Inside the chamber , orders to turn the reactor on . refuses , so signals for to hold a pistol to ' head . After pleads with him to cooperate , she and put their hands on a handprint scanner to turn on the reactor . Bane then orders his men to take the three board members back to the surface . Blake drives around in his unmarked unit , logging 's cement plants and locations they 've done construction in . He is talking on his cell phone with , who tells him to keep looking deeper . He then pulls up to a cement plant . In the reactor plant , completes his work - converting the reactor into a four megaton nuclear bomb . Bane orders his men to remove the reactor 's core , which objects to - removing the core will render the bomb unstable and cause it to melt down within five months - until threatens to harm 's family if he does n't cooperate . As he walks through the cement plant , recognizes one of the construction workers as the cement truck driver whose truck prevented the police from getting closer to the stock exchange during the raid . Blake mentions that he is not allowed to believe in coincidences . On cue , the driver 's colleague tries to swing a knife at him . Blake twists the guy 's arm and shoots him . The driver grabs from behind , and after a struggle , fires his gun at the truck . The bullet ricochets off the barrel and hits the driver in the back . Blake tries to get the driver to reveal what he 's working on , but it is too late - the man has died . is disgusted with his use of lethal force and tosses his pistol away . When he gets out his cell phone and leaves a message for , notices barrels of polyisobutylene and motor oil , and realizes that using 's construction crews , has rigged numerous construction areas around the city with explosive charges . As he drives away from the cement plant , gets on his radio and warns that the cops are about to head into a trap . immediately yells to the watch commanders with him to start withdrawing the officers under their charge . Meanwhile , the mayor shows up at to watch the play against the . He heads to his private box after shrugging off reporters asking him about cops heading underground , using the training exercise story suggested to . As cops search the tunnels , and his men arrive at the stadium , breaking in through the boiler room , and take up positions in the locker room tunnel as a young boy sings the national anthem . All of them are carrying detonators in their hands . During the national anthem , numerous Rogues players are seen , ready to take the field , including , Wide and , , and Tight End , along with former coach . When catches the child 's singing , he comments , " That 's a lovely , lovely voice . "At the end of the song , kicker ( 's own mayor in a cameo appearance ) kicks off to begin the first quarter . Bane comments , " Let the games begin ! " and presses the button on a remote control detonator . Several different events occur simultaneously:--In the tunnels , officers stop when they hear booms . As they are trying to register and identify the noise , portions of the ceilings across the sewer and subway system collapse , trapping them underground.--A series of large explosions rip through , destroying buildings and infrastructure alike . Bridges leading up to the city , with the exception of the , are destroyed by 's explosives , trapping the entire population of the city inside.--Blake is driving down another street , siren wailing , when the street starts to blow up . Street lamps , buildings , and telephone poles collapse all around his car , while other vehicles are tossed . He manages to stay ahead of the explosives for a short amount of time until one blast causes his car to flip over once before landing upright on its wheels , demolished . Once he comes to his senses , gets on the radio with , who confirms 's predictions : every cop in the city is trapped in the tunnels . But realizes that not every cop is stuck down there , and realizes that will try to assassinate . Unfortunately , his car has been demolished . With no other option , grabs a shotgun from the trunk of his car , and commandeers an SUV from another uninjured motorist . Two of 's henchmen arrive at the hospital , searching for . They fire short bursts with their submachine guns as they enter the lobby , causing patients and guards to take cover . As they search the hospital , is alerted to their presence when the power goes out and the hospital switches to emergency lighting . He climbs out of his bed . Outside , Blake screeches to a halt and runs through the lobby . As he searches the corridor , he hears gunshots . He runs to 's room , draws his shotgun , and kicks down the door , to discover that has already killed the two henchmen . only has a second to register this before puts a pistol to the back of his head and orders him to get his coat.--At , wide receiver is running the ball down the field when explosions go off in the support columns to the foundation , causing the field to collapse and swallow the players , except for , who manages to run the ball to the end zone for a touchdown , only noticing the destruction when he looks behind him . An additional bomb goes off in the mayor 's box , incinerating him and his aides . As the debris settles , 's men storm the bleachers , taking the crowd hostage , while , and other mercenaries march onto the remains of the field . He declares to the crowd that he and his men have come to liberate . He displays the fusion reactor core , calling it the " instrument of their liberation " and " interviews " in front of the shocked audience . After having admit that he is the only person who knows how to disarm the bomb , thanks him , then breaks 's neck . also declares that he has left one citizen in charge of the detonator who will trigger the bomb in case of any sort of civil rebellion . also threatens the government forces that should anybody try to enter or leave the city , he will detonate the nuclear weapon , thus forcing the government forces to guard the city and stop anybody from leaving . The is left intact as a means to provide food and supplies to 's citizens . As drives to his apartment with , says he has to get in front of a camera , but discourages him , saying that will shoot him if he shows his face . The next day , proceeds to , where more than 1,000 prisoners have been incarcerated as per the , which gave power to the police . He reads out 's speech revealing the truth about , and declares the prisoners free , as the man who drew up the himself was a murderer and a madman . The prisoners join and together enforce what calls " martial law " : forcing the elite out of their homes , holding courts presided over by ( ) and offering them a choice : exile or death . " Exile " means being forced to walk on the frozen underneath the , where the ice cracks and drowns anyone making the crossing . " Death " is revealed to be the same thing , as those who choose it get sentenced to " death by exile . "84 days into the siege , the slips an intelligence team into disguised as relief workers , under the command of ( ) . They meet with , , , and some other cops who managed to escape being trapped underground . The soldiers , , and the surviving cops begin tracking three military trucks , one of which carries the nuclear weapon ( they ca n't tell which one has the bomb because they all have lead - lined roofs ) . To avoid detection of the weapon , the three trucks are being driven around the city continuously . takes and his men to a office that and are sheltered in . takes responsibility for the creation of the reactor which the bomb was molded from . explains that as the reactor 's cells deteriorate , the reactor will become very unstable , and regardless of what happens , the bomb will go off in three weeks . admits that he could reconnect the core to the reactor to re - stabilize it . Blake prepares to leave with , but orders him to stay with and while he goes to call in a report . Unfortunately , someone has betrayed and his team , for just as they are leaving the hideout , a group of 's henchmen ambush them and open fire on them . and quickly escape by slipping out a back door , while is captured by a henchman . ' team draws their weapons and begin shooting back , but prove no match for 's men , and they are shot dead . When breaks cover and tries to flee , he is shot in the chest and falls . As he lies on the ground , appears over him . says he 'll die before he can talk to his commander . assures him , " I 'm on your schedule , captain , " and crushes 's neck . Bane orders his men to round up and the others for judgment and to hang the soldiers ' bodies from one of the bridges as a message for the world . All this time , , holed up in the prison , is watching the havoc in on a TV set in the prison . He gets the doctor there to crudely fix his back ; as his fight with partially dislocated his vertebrae . The doctor puts into a crude form of traction and pushes the vertebrae back into place . The doctor tells to remain in that position until he can stand by himself . Enduring the pain , hallucinates that he sees 's ( ) who proclaims his immortality . As the days wear on in the prison , 's anger builds , and he is determined to save . He rigorously trains his body with pullups , pushups , and situps and he attempts to make the escape with the rope twice , but fails each time . After the second attempt , questions how a child could have escaped , but he could not . The doctor explains that while paradoxically , it seems as if having no fear of death should enhance his escape chances , in reality the human trait of fearing death is the necessary ingredient . There are suggestions that -- in his grief over 's death , physical disability , 8 - year retirement from his persona , and isolation-- is inured to mortality . He seems to have the death wish that had tried to remedy earlier with the shock of his leaving . solves the dilemma in replying that he fears dying in prison when the people of can only be saved by him if he were to escape . He realizes that the child had escaped without the safety rope , and chooses not to use the rope in his third attempt . reveals his confidence by packing supplies for himself in a bag . He begins the climb to the Arabic chants of " " meaning " Rise . " When he reaches the pivotal point , requiring the jump , a stream of bats flows from a tunnel inside the cave and startle him , but increase his confidence . takes the jump and latches onto the protruding rock and succeeds in his final attempt . He subsequently throws down a rope from the top , allowing all the current prisoners to escape as well . Bruce returns to as . He manages to gain trust from after he catches her in the act of beating up two gangbangers trying to harm a young boy by offering her the program ; accepts . gets to and by letting 's men capture him , as has access to 's backup . To escape , comes in and declares to the mercenaries that wants and by themselves . She knocks out the mercenaries and undoes their handcuffs . tells he 's found a nice girlfriend and says , " He should be so lucky" . Once has put in his , and has found the , he saves and some of the surviving cops after they are captured and are forced to cross the frozen river , simultaneously lighting a huge symbol which lets everyone in know that he is back . When sees the symbol he states , " Impossible . Keep her close ( pointing at ) . He 'll come for her . " reveals that trigger or no trigger , the nuclear device is unstable and will detonate anyway the next day , and recovers a signal jammer from the which can block the signals from the trigger . With and 's help , frees the police trapped in the sewers by using the to destroy debris blocking the tunnels , and rescues after he is captured trying to rescue cops through a manhole cover . The next morning , the rallied police forces , led by , assemble on , facing against 's army . One of 's men gets on a megaphone and orders the cops to disperse or be shot at . replies back , " There 's only one police in this town ! " Bane orders his to open fire , but as one of the prepares to blast the cops with its cannons , the appears and disables the cannons . As it flies off , the incited cops cheer and rush 's men . Physical combat ensues between 's men and the cops . fights again , with more success . He punches 's mask , detaching some of the tubes on his mask that feed his anesthetic , which weakens him greatly , angers the villain , and forces into the offensive . avoids blow after blow and then lands a series of furious punches on 's mask and body , culminating with a roundhouse kick that sends to the floor . When asks him how he escaped and came back , stating " I broke you , " tries to force to reveal the location of the trigger device stating , " Tell me where the trigger is . Then you have my permission to die , " appropriately using 's own phrase against him . After tells that he is not the only person who can escape from that prison , suddenly stabs in the side in a soft spot in the suit with her dagger sliding dangerously between his ribs . It is then revealed that " " 's real name is , and that she was the child who escaped from the on prison . had been a prisoner there and her protector . During the prison riot that claimed her mother 's life , helped her escape , but in the process was hurt severely . The prison doctor attempted to repair the damage , but his methods resulted in needing anesthetics to constantly keep the pain at bay . After she escaped , tracked down her father : 's . She convinced her father to rescue , and both were trained within the of . Apart from the realization that was an extremist monster , the injuries inflicted on 's face became a reminiscence of the suffering endured by 's mother in the pit for 's , which was why was excommunicated from the group . 's intention is to take revenge on for killing her father , as well as finishing the mission of destroying for its greed that cost her father 's life . She hits the trigger of the nuclear weapon , but has managed to fit the signal jammer on the weapon just in time . However , there are only eleven minutes left for the nuke to detonate . / says farewell and leaves to kill . As is about to execute with a shotgun , crashes into the lobby on the and mortally wounds by blasting him with the 's large cannons . and walk out to the . As they are climbing in , is shot dead by with a submachine gun as he fires from outside the stock exchange . He and several other officers are killed when orders her 's driver to gun them down . She takes control of the truck carrying the weapon , but her escorts are finished off in a prolonged chase sequence , with riding the and flying the in the air , and attacking the convoy . 's truck goes off the road and crashes , and she is fatally wounded because she is n't wearing a seatbelt . In her last moments alive , she explains how her access to the reactor chamber allowed her to set a timer to flood it , preventing the weapon from being returned there . She dies believing she had finally completed her father 's work and avenged his death . escapes the flooding chamber and realizes there is no way of stabilizing the weapon . The weapon can not be deactivated , and will detonate in less than 2 minutes . explains that the has no autopilot , and that he will need to fly the bomb out of . shares a kiss with , before revealing to his true identity : He says that a true hero puts a coat on a young boy after his parents are killed , and says , " it 's going to be alright son , " as does to in . As he exits , says his true name . With not much time left , attaches the bomb to the , and flies it away from the city , and out over the bay . The citizens of watch as the weapon detonates on the horizon , and the mushroom - cloud balloons over the bay . In the aftermath , the police recapture all of those released by . A private funeral is held on the grounds of for , by those who knew his true identity ( including and ) . Alfred sobs quietly , feeling that he let 's parents down by not protecting him . Blake resigns from the police force , and explains to that will never really know who saved it . tells him that they will know that it was ' The ' who saved them . In tribute , a statue has been erected in 's memory . In the aftermath of 's death , certain provisions are made . The majority of the estate is sold , with the money given to . is given to the city of , as a place for orphaned boys to stay . Strangely , one of the family 's treasures ( a string of pearls ) can not be located . is also given a duffel bag as part of 's will . When presenting his , the clerk who checks it suggests that he go by his real first name as it appears on his : . Back in , has workers go over the second camouflage ) in the underground storage area . Wanting to know what he could have done to get the autopilot functioning , he is surprised when the workers explain that the autopilot is functional , and the computer log shows that made the changes 6 months prior . Up on the roof of 's , finds the once broken ( destroyed by him personally by the end of the second movie ) repaired . Meanwhile , has opened the duffel bag , and finds a spelunking rope , and coordinates . The information leads him to a waterfall ( the entrance to the batcave ) . He makes his way past the waterfall , and into the cave , where his light attracts a flurry of bats . The light he uses , given to him by , is the same the uses when he first enters the cave in . In , , has returned to the restaurant that he had visited during 's absence long ago . As he scans the tables , he sees and at a nearby table and smiles . A fleeting glance between both and is enough to assure the other that each of them will be alright . After had attached the bomb to the and taken off , he ejected with an escape pod to distance himself from the explosion and allowed the autopilot to continue to transport the bomb . There is a shot of in a flying vehicle with a timer at five seconds , leading viewers to believe the explosion killed him , but was not in the carrying the bomb and was not within the blast radius of the bomb in that time - frame . In the final shot , we see walking over a pool of water . As he does so , his movement activates the black flooring containing the batsuit . Blake stares around him as the flooring rises up.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The film begins in medias , with the silhouette of a man holding onto a rope - like object -- a neck - tie , by which one man is dangling another off the edge of a building . The man holding the neck - tie is Oh - ( sik ) , who commands the other man to hear his story . The movie then cuts backward to the year 1988 . - is a Korean businessman with a wife and daughter . On his daughter 's fourth birthday , he is picked up by police for being drunk and disorderly . He harrasses several other people at the police station , showing them the angel 's wings he bought for his daughter . Finally , he has to be bailed out by his old friend , - . While - is in a phone booth talking with - 's daughter , - , and his wife , - , - is kidnapped by unidentified people . - appears in a private prison resembling a shabby hotel room . He has been kept there for two months with no word of who is holding him there or why . He receives food through a small hatch at the bottom of the door , and is gassed into unconsciousness whenever he becomes suicidal , or when his holders need access to the room ( e.g. to maintain it ; cut his hair ) . His only contact with the outside world is through the television , from which he learns one day that his wife has been murdered , his daughter has been sent to foster parents and that he is himself the prime suspect ; his captors took blood and other items from him , and have presumably left enough evidence at the crime scene to implicate him as the perpetrator . This , together with his continued captivity , causes - to slide into near - madness and violent hallucinations . Attempting to get a grip on his sanity and determine his captor , - fills several notebooks with an autobiography - prison diary , listing everybody whom he could have possibly wronged in the past , but is unable to figure out who would hate him so profoundly as to imprison him like this . From year 5 on , he starts to tattoo lines in his arm for every year he is imprisoned , and forces himself to train by shadowboxing , punching at the walls of his prison until thick calluses form on his knuckles . When one of his deliveries of fried dumplings turns out to have an extra metal chopstick , he conceals it and uses it to slowly dig a hole into one of the walls . Over the next ten years , he works out , follows current events on TV , and loosens enough bricks to glimpse the outside world . He calculates that he will need another month to make the hole large enough to escape . That night , he is gassed again and a lady hypnotizes him . He wakes up to unfamiliar surroundings . Just as abruptly as he was captured , - is set free on the rooftop of a building that has been constructed over the place where he went missing . He has a new suit of clothes and his prison diaries . Adjusting to the bright afternoon light , he sees another man sitting on the edge of the building with his small dog . The first human being he has interacted with in fifteen years , Oh - is taken aback , unable to have a proper conversation with him . We learn that the man is suicidal and says to , " Even though I 'm no better than a beast , do n't I have the right to live ? " . He then attempts to jump off the edge , but Oh - grabs his neck tie , saving him from death . - tells the man to delay his death , because he wants to tell him his story , to which he utters " What ? " . The scene ends at the point in which the movie began . After relating his story , Oh - walks off and out of the building , ignoring the despondent man 's plea to listen to his story in turn . As he is leaving the front entrance , the suicidal man lands on a car behind - , killing himself and his pet . - pauses , followed by a wide smile . " and the world laughs with you . Weep and you weep alone " , he thinks to himself ; a direct quotation from the first line of 's famous poem , . Throughout the movie , Oh - uses this quote as a mantra for himself whenever he faces horrible situations . Wandering the streets of the city , - does not know what to do with his new - found freedom due to his enemies framing him as the murderer of his wife . When a gang of thugs attack him , he finds that his ten out of fifteen years of solitary training have paid off ; he fends them off with only his fists . Next , - stands on the street looking at fish swimming in an aquarium , when a homeless man walks up and gives him a wallet full of cash and a cellphone . He then meets Mi - do ( - ) , a girl who works in a sushi bar ; he recognizes her from a cooking show he often watched while imprisoned , and she says he looks familiar too . An unknown man contacts - via his cellphone , and claims to be the one who imprisoned him . He mentions it was an experiment , and taunts - to come and find him and learn the reason for the imprisonment . He gives a mysterious clue : " a grain of sand and a rock both sink in water with the same speed " . - asks Mi - do for something alive to eat , and gulps down an entire living squid , much to - do 's shock . - collapses with a high fever ; - takes pity on him and takes him in . At her apartment , - experiences a moment of weakness and tries to sexually assault - do . She fends him off , but understands he did it out of desperation . She tells him that she will make love to him soon , and she will indicate when she is ready for it . Over the next few days , - does some inquiries and finds out that - 's daughter has been adopted by a couple in . - decides not to contact her yet and goes home with Mi - do , only to find out that she has been chatting on her computer for some time with a person , who subsequently reveals to be - 's captor . - feels he can not trust Mi - do and leaves . Based on the taste of the dumplings that he ate for 15 years while imprisoned , and having seen the name " " on a receipt fragment once , - goes to various Chinese restaurants with " " in the name in order to determine exactly which restaurant it was . When he finally finds the right one , called " " , he follows the delivery boy on one of his calls , and finds the prison . Once there , he finds and ties up the prison 's manager , , and tortures him by pulling out the man 's teeth with a claw hammer ( 15 , one for each year he was imprisoned ) . points him to tape recordings , one bearing his name . From the recording , - learns that the facility is a private prison for people who want someone locked away . His captor had him booked for 15 years and even suggested what drugs to give him if he 'd go insane . The only reason the captor would give is : " Oh - talks too much . " Upon leaving , the prison guards gang up on - , but he fights them all off with nothing more than his clawhammer and his bare fists ( although he does get stabbed in the back ) . injured , - is put into a taxi by a man passing by . The man sends the taxi off to - do 's exact address , revealing he is - 's captor , but - is unable to do anything about it in his weakened state . Back at home , Mi - nurses him back to health . - goes to see his old friend - in his internet shop , and plays the tape recording for him . - does n't recognize the voice , but succeeds in identifying Mi - do 's on - line chat friend , a person calling himself " " . They initiate a chat and congratulates - because his wife 's murder case has been dismissed , and taunts him some more . - returns home and tries to violently force more information from - do , still thinking she is working with . Suddenly , - calls , saying that he has tracked down 's user and found the owner 's details . The owner 's name is ' - oh ' and there is also an address . - realizes it is an apartment in the building accross the street from - do 's appartment . He rushes off , investigates the apartment and finally meets his captor , a man called - jin ( - ) , and his bodyguard , , in one of the rooms . - tries to attack , but is incapacitated by . - tells he can not kill him , because if he does , he will never learn why he was imprisoned , and if he tries to use torture , - will remote - deactivate the pacemaker he had surgically placed in his own chest . But - jin offers to play a game with - : he must find out why all this happened to him in the next five days . If he fails , - do will die on 5 . If he succeeds , - jin promises to kill himself . While leaving , - casually remarks that - left his front door open . - races home and finds that and his gang of thugs have captured and sexually abused - do . - is roughed up , and is about to use the same teeth - pulling torture trick on - , when shows up at the door and offers a suitcase full of money , if he leaves . takes it and while leaving , - threatens to cut off 's hand . - and - do leave the apartment . On the road , they grow closer together , and - indicates she is ready to make love . After the love - making , they are gassed and - leaves a package in their room . It contains 's severed hand . - realizes that - jin can hear every word he says , so he must have bugged him . They go to a shop and have a wire removed from his shoe . The next day , with Mi - do 's help , - finds out that ' ' refers to his old high school , where he discovers - jin was once a fellow student . He calls his friend - , who confirms the finding , and mentions that - 's sister , who attended the school at the same time and had a promiscuous reputation , killed herself later . However , due to the not being able to spy on - anymore , - has gone to - 's internet shop , and enraged over the comments made about his sister , he beats - to death while having - listen over the phone . Strongly suspecting that the reason for his imprisonment has something to do with the sister 's death , - tracks down . Due to losing a hand to - jin , he is cooperative now and agrees to hold Mi - do in - 's old prison facility to keep her safe from - jin . He also confirms that - was drugged and hypnotized several times while imprisoned . - finds another classmate and discusses - jin and his sister with her . Apparently , there were growing rumors about the sister 's sex life and her possibly being pregnant at the time . The rumors were spread by - , but it seems himself was the source . Then he has a sudden recollection of memory . One day at school , as it turned out , - had unintentionally witnessed - jin and his sister - ah while engaging in a sexual encounter . Not knowing at the time that the two were related and the scene he was witnessing was an instance of incest , - casually mentioned what he had seen to one of his own friends , just before transferring to a school in . Eventually , the rumor started a life of its own and - ah threw herself over a dam on 5 , killing herself . - finally realizes the solution to the first clue : " a grain of sand and a rock both sink in water with the same speed " , means that a casual remark and an outright accusation may both have the same devastating consequences to a person , so - holds - responsible for his sister 's death . - finally finds out where - jin lives , and confronts him with all of this information . He accuses - jin of creating a search for a memory that was erased using hypnosis ; but - claims not to have messed with - 's memory , - had simply forgotten it himself because he thought it was insignificant . However , his litlle slip of the tongue grew out of proportion , to the point where it was rumored that - ah had become pregnant . It was never clear whether this had in fact occurred , but believing it and fearing public humiliation , she killed herself . , however , implies that - jin killed his own sister , afraid of fathering her child , and tried to shift the blame to - to cope with the guilt . - jin does indeed possess a photo of ah on the dam , dated the day of her death , 5 . He took the picture , so he was present at her suicide . But - jin then side - steps these allegations with an even more devastating revelation . He gives - a photo album , the first picture of which is a family portrait of himself , his wife , and his daughter . The remaining photos in the album are of his daughter growing older , until in horror - discovers that his daughter is none other than Mi - do ( at the same time , - finds angel 's wings in a bag , the same - had bought for her 4th birthday ) . By carefully manipulating both of their lives - secretly taking care of Mi - do from the age of 3 ( probably the reason for 15 years , 3 + 15=18 ) - - 's since his incarceration and - do 's since her father vanished - and hypnotizing each of them independently , - jin was able to cause - and - do to commit incest as well . - goes into a rage and fights with . Despite being mortally wounded , keeps him subdued , until - jin shoots and kills him . - then learns that is still working for - jin , having been granted the ownership of the prison in exchange for severing his hand . is with Mi - do , and is ordered to give a similar album to her at - 's command . - is horrified , and begs - jin not to let this happen . He then gets on his hands and knees and starts to bark like a dog , eventually going so far as to cut off his own tongue so that he will never talk too much again . During this scene - holds a handkerchief to his mouth , and it looks as if he is crying , but then it shows clearly he is laughing with smugness and struggling to hide it so he can continue to watch - torture himself . With his thirst for vengeance that was his sole reason for living finally spent , - spares Mi - do from knowing and readies to kill himself and - with the same bullet . He changes his mind , however , and gives the remote switch to his own pacemaker . - immediately grabs it and uses it , only to find that it does n't kill - jin , but activates a tape recorder . - exits the penthouse in an elevator , leaving - alone to be tormented by a tape recording of his incestuous love - making with his own daughter . As - jin leaves , we are taken back into his guilt - ridden memory of his sister 's death . He is holding - ah over the dam , trying to save her from killing herself , and she says that she has always known that - jin was afraid , that she regrets nothing and asks him to let go of her . She seems at peace , and eventually he releases his grip . Back in the elevator , - jin realizes that even after getting his revenge against - , nothing will take his pain away . The camera is focused on his open hand , which slowly closes as if around a gun , cocks an imaginary hammer -- and fires the real gun into his head in the elevator . In an epilogue set in a wintry landscape , - goes to a hypnotist ( the same one whom - jin hired to hypnotize both - and - do ) and asks for her help to forget the secret . He writes her a letter , since he can no longer talk . The hypnotist said that she originally did not want to help him , but she was touched by his last sentence : " Even though I 'm no more than a beast , do n't I , too , have the right to live ? " . It is the same sentence Oh - heard from the suicidal man who appeared at the beginning of the movie . The hypnotist tells Oh - to imagine himself back at - 's penthouse . She uses hypnosis to split - into two personalities : the " " , who remembers the secret , and the " ignorant " , who does n't know . When the hypnotist asks - to split into the two people , a reflection of himself appears in the window . The hypnotist tells him that the monster will walk away and for every step he takes , he will age a year and die when he reaches 70 . The reflection is the " " - he holds a grim expression and remains unmoved , unwilling to leave his place in - 's mind . The " ignorant " - , reflected in the glass , mourns the loss of a major part of his life . The camera cuts to the cassette player which then finishes playing the music that has set the scene . Oh - is wished the best of luck , and the screen turns black . - wakes up . The hypnotist has already gone , and he is left lying on the cold ground with a delirious feeling . He stumbles about , and finally with some hesitation he meets up with Mi - do and they embrace . The soft spoken Mi - tells - that she loves him , and a large smile appears on his face , which slowly disintegrates into a tortured > 

 < synopsis > Chapter One : " Once Upon a ..... in - Occupied France"The film opens in 1941 with ( ) , a detective of the - , proudly known as the " , " visiting French dairy farmer ( ) . After making casual conversation in and taking a glass of 's delicious milk , claims to have exhausted his and asks to switch to . In , then notes that his papers state that all of the Jewish families around 's region have been accounted for , except the , who have vanished completely in the past year . believes that someone is hiding them very well . After rambling on a bit about the logic he uses to hunt , he admits that he is required to conduct a thorough search of 's house . By dropping a subtle hint about whether or not to leave 's family alone in the future , manages to coerce and get him to confess that he is hiding the under the floorboards . points out the approximate location of the hidden . understands that the do n't speak , and tells that he will be switching back to . In , he thanks for the milk and hospitality , then opens the door , seemingly calling out to 's family , but in actuality to booted soldiers , who come inside and take up positions . On 's orders , the soldiers fire their guns into the floorboards , killing the . However , hears a noise , and sees the teenage ( ) running away into the hills . considers shooting her with his pistol but decides against it , yelling after her , " revoir , Two : " Inglourious Basterds"The second chapter takes place three years later in 1944 , just prior to the Allied invasion of . We see redneck ( ) addressing in formation his newly formed eight - man Jewish - American commando unit . He proceeds to explain to them , in drill sergeant style , that they will be dropped behind enemy lines to cause havoc to all Nazi soldiers they come across with the goal of bringing fear into the heart of the enemy . He further explains to them that the normal standards of military conduct will not apply because the Nazis themselves have no humanity and are not deserving of any humanity in return . He mentions that he has blood running through his veins and that each and every one of the men in his command owes him a debt of 100 scalps . We next cut to a scene showing us the terrible - tempered ( ) , angrily ridiculing two of his military command for not being able to deal with the , as their activities are demoralizing to his fighting men . then interviews ( ) , whose entire patrol was recently ambushed and killed by the , and he was the only survivor . When asks if they marked him like they did the other survivors , shows him the swastika carved into his forehead . 's story is told in flashback : all of the soldiers have already been killed except for three : , . ( ) , and a third soldier . Raine has come forward , and threatens to have him killed if he does not disclose the whereabouts and information on a nearby patrol . is adamant that he will not provide information that could possibly harm other German soldiers and calls for . ( ) , known to German soldiers as the " " to beat to death with a baseball bat , which he proceeds to do , which very much delights all of the . The second survivor is also shot dead in a moment of excitement . Raine then interrogates the non - English speaking . . ( ) acts as their interpreter . Utterly demoralized by the beating to death of his sergeant , quickly provides the with all they need to know after which lets go - but not before carving a swastika into 's forehead with his own customized knife - as a branding ( swastika carving is 's trademark ) . The scene ends with commenting to Raine that he is becoming quite good at carving . responds : " You know how you get to do n't ? . "Chapter Three : " German in 1 , 1944 : has assumed the identity of " . " How she manages to do so is not revealed . She has also become the proprietress of a cinema in downtown , which is chosen by ( ) , a spotlight - hungry sniper - turned - actor whose exploits are being celebrated in the Nazi propaganda film der ( 's ) , as the setting for the film premiere . He is infatuated with and convinces ( ) to hold the premiere in her cinema . , however , does not reciprocate 's feelings . realizes that the presence of so many high ranking officials and officers provides an excellent opportunity for revenge . She resolves to burn down the cinema using the massive quantities of flammable nitrate film she holds in storage during the premiere ( because nitrate film burns three times faster than paper , and is cheaper than buying lots of explosives ; the English narrator ( ) tells us that the flammability of nitrate film was such so that you could n't even take a reel on a bus ) , and she and her / re - edit the fourth reel of " der . "Chapter Four : " Operation Kino"In the meantime , the have also learned of the leadership 's plan to attend the premiere and dispatch a British officer , ( ) , to to lead , an attack on the cinema with the aid of the and a German double agent , an actress by the name of ( ) . meets with ( ) and ( ) and is chosen for the mission based on his expertise of German filmmakers . arranges to meet and two of the , and the psychotic ( ) ( who defected from the after killing thirteen in violent ways { some of which can be viewed in Chapter 2 } ) in the basement of a French tavern to arrange their plans . The only problem is that the night of the rendezvous is also the occasion of a German staff sergeant named ( ) celebrating the birth of his son with his soldier comrades . One of the German soldiers present strikes up a conversation with and notices that his accent is " odd . " An , ( ) ( whom we met earlier during Chapter 3 ) , who is in the tavern as well also notices the odd accent ( although is fluent in , he is using his British accent ) . joins and and plays one round of a guessing game with them ( with 's card , ) . He offers to buy the table a round of drinks . Unfortunately , betrays himself when he gives the wrong three - fingered order for whiskey ( holding up his ring , middle , and pointer fingers instead of his thumb , pointer finger , and middle finger ) , and the officer recognizes their deception . , , , and all of the , as well as the French tavern owner , subsequently kill each other in the resulting 15 second shootout : starts things off by telling to say " " to his balls , then shoots him in his groin . then shoots in turn and hits in her right leg , who falls backward in her chair , while falls backward and returns fire at . then stands up and repeatedly stabs in the back of the head , pinning his head to the table . stands up and shoots in the back at least twice . Beethoven shoots in the back . shoots in the stomach . Stiglitz turns and shoots four times in the torso and then also shoots in the heart , killing them both . shoots in the heart . Then , shoots with a double - barreled shotgun , killing him . shoots in the head . blindly guns down and with his submachine gun . Just then , and several of the arrive ( having waited outside the tavern and now alerted by the shooting ) , and a standoff ensures between them and . After agrees to surrender to the , retrieves 's pistol and fires four shots at , killing him , because had learned that was working for the enemy . The wounded allows herself to be captured by and the . A little later , angrily interrogates at a local animal clinic where he takes her for medical treatment for her bullet wound . He pokes a finger into the wound to make her explain the debacle in the tavern , and then tell him about . Raine decides to continue the operation against the cinema . Raine picks two of his best men , and ( ) , to make use of suicide bombs and the three of them will pose as Italian filmmakers escorting to the event . To explain the cast on her leg , will claim to have broken it in a mountain - climbing accident . , who is now an SD officer , investigates the carnage at the French pub and finds one of 's shoes left behind and also an autographed napkin which had signed for 's son , realizing that she was there and may have been wounded . He also identifies the bodies of the two - born , noting their reputation to disguise themselves as German soldiers to ambush squads . Chapter Five : " Revenge of the following evening , approaches and in the cinema lobby and is able to easily see through their disguises , as , , and can not speak fluent Italian or German ( is most obvious since he is speaking it with a thick accent ) . He questions alone and makes her try on the shoe he had retrieved from the tavern . It is a perfect fit . He strangles and kills her as a traitor , and orders the arrest of . As is driven off in a truck , he discovers one of his men , ( ) , has also been captured and is in the truck with him . reveals himself to be a turncoat . While speaking with and in the privacy of a closed restaurant , he tells them that four major leaders must all be killed to end the terrible war immediately . They are all attending 's , and he is prepared to let the assassination continue ... for a price . He has no intention of helping end the war only to be tried by a Jewish tribunal for war crimes and end up facing execution . In order to help end the war , he wants to make a deal ; one Raine can not authorize , but his commanding officer ( voice of ) can . has his radio operator help reach his general , where states the terms of his deal : he wants full military pension and benefits under his current rank , the of for everyone involved in the operation , American citizenship and a home on . He also reveals that he had planted 's explosives in 's box at the cinema ( which is shown in flashback ) , indicating that there are now three attempts against 's life ( and in the main theater , the explosives in 's box , and 's plot ) . Raine is placed on the radio and his general tells him that and his radio operator will drive him and in a truck to American lines , then surrender to them , whereupon will drive the truck the rest of the way to base and bring and the operator to him for debriefing . Meanwhile , during the showing of 's , and her assistant ( and ) ( ) are manning the projection booth when he tells her it is time . It is revealed in a flashback to a few days ago which shows filming a close - up of 's face making a speech in . They then force a local camera shop owner to develop the film by threatening to kill him and his family if he does n't , and edits the complete film on the fourth and final film reel of the movie and leaves them in the projection booth for them to run when the time is right . Flashing back to the present , tells that he needs to lock the auditorium and go behind the screen . As makes his way toward the auditorium , the two that have been left behind , and , leave their seats and exit the auditorium heading upstairs to the balcony level ... determined to kill by themselves ( neither of them are aware of 's capture or of 's plan to burn down the cinema with all of them inside ) . carefully spies on the two guards watching the entrance to 's opera box from the nearest restroom . loads the doctored fourth reel of 's onto the projector camera as locks the auditorium doors , sliding the safety locks at the tops and bottoms of the doors into place , and then slides a heavy iron crowbar through the door handles , further barring them . He steps behind the screen where had placed her entire stack of flammable nitrate film . pulls a lever to switch the projector to the doctored reel on a cue symbol in the film . Watching from behind the screen , lights up a cigarette and waits . Meanwhile , , who is uncomfortable with the way he is portrayed killing in the film , leaves the cinema auditorium and makes his way to the projectionist 's room to flirt with . She is deeply concerned at his intrusion and tells him to leave . However , the spurned pushes his way into the room and angrily confronts about her treatment of him , warning her that she 's no longer in a position to disrespect him . Needing to get out of the way , she asks him to lock the door , dropping a subtle hint : " we do n't have much time . " Soon as 's back is turned to her , she pulls out a small gun from her purse and shoots him in the back , mortally wounding him . Quickly she glances into the auditorium to make sure she was n't heard . Suddenly , she hears groan and realizes he 's still alive . In an apparent moment of pity , she turns him over , and he shoots her to death before he succumbs to his wounds . At the same time , and are preparing their ambush to take out the opera box guards . disguises himself as a waiter delivering a glass of champagne . The ambush goes off without a hitch and they kill both guards and then steal their machine guns . Meanwhile , we see greatly enjoying the battle scene in the movie , where is taking out numerous American soldiers by himself . But his joy comes to a quick end when 's challenge in the movie ( " Who wants to send a message to ? " ) is answered with the changes made to the fourth reel . The large image of 's face appears on the screen and she tells the audience ( speaking in heavily accented for the first and only time in the movie ) that they 're all going to die , and she is a ready to take revenge . On her cue , flicks his cigarette into the pile of nitrate film behind the screen , igniting it . The fire bursts through the screen , causing pandemonium in the auditorium . Just then , and burst into 's box and gun down , , 's secretary and French translator ( ) and the other leaders . As the cinema is engulfed in flames , and fire randomly into the crowd below them , who are attempting to flee , but escape is impossible , as the auditorium doors are now locked and barred . Finally , the dynamite that had planted in 's box , as well as the dynamite strapped to the ' legs , now goes off . The cinema is destroyed in the subsequent inferno , killing everybody inside . The next day , and his radio operator set off with and towards the American lines in , as part of the deal he had made with 's commanding officer . At the American lines , he surrenders to Raine and hands over his gun and sword . Raine orders to handcuff , and suddenly shoots the driver dead , ordering to scalp him over 's outraged protest . Raine reveals that while he appreciates 's underhanded deal and all the perks he 's secured for himself , he is incensed that on arriving in , intended to take off his uniform and blend in to the American populace , with nobody remembering all the heinous deeds he committed as a Nazi officer . Raine plans to remedy that . The film ends with carving a swastika into 's forehead and declaring to that it may just be his " masterpiece . > 

 < synopsis > The story begins in 1823 as the elderly attempts suicide by slitting his throat while loudly begging forgiveness for having killed in 1791 . Placed in a lunatic asylum for the action , is visited by a young priest who seeks to take his confession . is sullen and uninterested but eventually warms to the priest and launches into a long " confession " about his relationship with . 's story goes on through the night and into the next day . He reminisces about his youth , particularly about his devotion to and his love for music and how he pledges to to remain celibate as a sacrifice if he can somehow devote his life to music . He describes how his father 's plans for him were to go into commerce , but suggests that the sudden death of his father , who choked to death during a meal , was " a miracle " that allowed him to pursue a career in music . In his narrative , he is suddenly an adult joining the 18th century cultural elite in , the " city of musicians " . begins his career as a devout , - fearing man who believes his success and talent as a composer are 's rewards for his piety . He is content as the court composer for II.Mozart arrives in with his patron , , the - of . secretly observes at the 's palace , but they are not properly introduced . sees that offstage , is irreverent and lewd . He also first recognizes the immense talent displayed in the adult works of . In 1781 , when meets the , presents with a " of Welcome " , which he toiled to create . After hearing the march only once , plays it from memory , critiques it , and effortlessly improvises a variation , transforming 's " trifle " into the " pi andrai " march from his 1786 opera " The Marriage of . Salieri reels at the notion of speaking through the childish , snappish : nevertheless , he regards his music as miraculous . Gradually , 's faith is shaken . He believes that , through 's genius , is cruelly laughing at 's own musical mediocrity . 's struggles with are intercut with scenes showing 's own trials and tribulations with life in : pride at the initial reception of his music ; anger and disbelief over his subsequent treatment by the of the 's court ; happiness with his wife and his son ; and grief at the death of his father . becomes more desperate as the family 's expenses increase and his commissions decrease . When learns of 's financial straits , he sees his chance to avenge himself , using " 's " ( the literal meaning of " " ) as the instrument . hatches a complex plot to gain ultimate victory over and . He disguises himself in a black mask and costume similar to one he saw wear at a party , and commissions to write a requiem mass , giving him a down payment and the promise of an enormous sum upon completion . begins to write the piece , the in D minor , unaware of the true identity of his mysterious patron and oblivious of his murderous intentions . Glossing over any details of how he might commit the murder , dwells on the anticipation of the admiration of his peers and the court , when they applaud the magnificent , and he claims to be the music 's composer . Only and would know the truth that wrote his own requiem mass , and that could only watch while finally receives the fame and renown he deserves . 's financial situation worsens and the composing demands of the and " The " drive him to the point of exhaustion as he alternates work between the two pieces . Constanze leaves him and takes their son with her . His health worsens and he collapses during the premiere performance of " The " . takes the stricken home and convinces him to work on the . dictates while transcribes through the night . When returns in the morning , she orders to leave . Constanze locks the manuscript away despite 's objections , but as she goes to wake her husband , has died . The is left unfinished , and is left powerless as 's body is hauled out of for burial in a pauper 's mass grave during a rainstorm . The film ends as finishes recounting his story to the visibly shaken young priest . concludes that killed rather than allow to share in even an ounce of his glory , and that he is consigned to be the " patron saint of mediocrity " . mockingly absolves the priest of his own mediocrity and blesses his fellow patients as he is taken away in his wheelchair . The last sound heard before the closing credits roll is 's high - pitched > 

 < synopsis > In , , was the wife of a musician who left her and their 3 - year - old daughter , to pursue a career in music . She banned music in the family and opened a shoe - making family business . Ninety - six years later , her great - great - grandson , 12 - year - old , now lives with and their family . He secretly dreams of becoming a musician like , a popular actor and singer of 's generation . One day , inadvertently damages the photo of with her parents at the center of the family ofrenda and removes it , discovering that her father ( whose face is torn out ) was holding 's famous guitar . Concluding that is his great - great - grandfather , ignores his grandmother 's objections and leaves to enter a talent show for the of the . He enters 's mausoleum and steals his guitar to use in the show , but becomes invisible to everyone in the village plaza . However , he can see and be seen by his dog and his skeletal dead relatives who are visiting from the of the for the holiday . Taking him there , they realize that can not visit as removed her photo from the ofrenda . Discovering that he is cursed for stealing from the dead , must return to the of the Living before sunrise or he will become one of the dead : to do so , he must receive a blessing from a member of his family using an Aztec marigold petal that can undo the curse placed upon him by stealing 's guitar . offers a blessing but on the condition that he abandon his musical pursuits when he returns to the of the Living ; refuses and attempts to seek 's blessing . encounters , a down - on - his - luck skeleton who once played with and offers to help reach him . In return , asks to take his photo back to the of the Living so he can visit his daughter before she forgets him and he disappears completely . Hctor attempts to return to his relatives , but escapes and infiltrates 's mansion , learning along the way that an old friendship between the two deteriorated before 's death . welcomes as his descendant , but confronts them , imploring to take his photo . soon realizes that murdered using a poisoned drink and stole the songs he had written , passing them off as his own to become famous . To maintain his legacy , steals the photo and has and thrown into a cenote pit . realizes that is his actual great - great - grandfather and that is 's daughter , the only living person who still remembers him . With the help of - who turns into an alebrije - the dead Riveras find and rescue them . reveals that 's decision to return home to her and resulted in his death , and and reconcile . They infiltrate 's sunrise concert to retrieve 's photo from and expose his crimes . is crushed by a falling church bell as in his previous life , but the photo falls into the water and disappears . As the sun rises , is in danger of being forgotten by and disappearing . blesses with no conditions attached so he can return to the of the Living , where he plays a song for that wrote for her during her childhood . The song sparks her memory of and revitalizes her , and she gives the torn - out piece of the photo from the ofrenda , which shows 's face . reconciles with , accepting both him and music back into the family . One year later , proudly presents the family ofrenda - featuring a photo of the now deceased and the restored photo of and - to his new baby sister . Letters kept by contain evidence that stole 's songs . As a result , 's legacy is destroyed and the community honors instead . In the of the , and join for a visit to the living as sings and plays for his dead and living > 

 < synopsis > A boy called ( voice : ) uses his toys to act out a bank robbery . The bank is a cardboard box , the robber is ( voice : ) assisted by ( voice : ) , and the bystanders include ( voice : ) and her sheep . The day is saved by cowboy doll ( voice : ) playing the sheriff , with help from the dinosaur ( voice : ) . is the only toy who gets to say his own lines because he has a pull - string that makes him say things like " Reach for the sky ! " and " You 're my favorite deputy!"During the opening credits ( soundtrack : 's " You 've Got a in Me " ) , takes downstairs to find his mother ( voice : ) decorating the dining room for his birthday party . He asks if they can leave the decorations up until they move , and his mom agrees . She says the guests will arrive soon and sends him back upstairs to get his baby sister ( voice : ) , whose crib is in his room . tosses onto his bed before he pulls Molly out of her crib and carries her away . Woody and the other toys have seemed limp and inanimate up to this point , but as soon as leaves the room , sits up and expresses surprise that the birthday party is today . He calls " Ok , everybody , the coast is clear , " and the other toys come to life too . Woody calls a staff meeting and tells to spread the word . Within a few minutes ( during which makes a date with for that evening ) , all the toys are assembled . Woody starts by reminding them all to find a moving buddy so they do n't get lost when the family moves to their new house , which will happen in a week . Then he tries to downplay the news that 's birthday party is happening today , but it causes a commotion as the toys know that 's actual birthday is n't till next week . worries that someone will give another dinosaur , and many of the toys have similar concerns . Woody points out that it makes sense to have the party before the move , then tries to calm them down . He 's interrupted when ( voice : ) the piggybank , stationed near the window , announces that the guests are arriving . The toys rush to the window to see the presents the kids are bringing ; the bigger boxes make them especially nervous . predicts " we 're next month 's garage sale fodder for sure . " finally says , " If I send out the troops , will you all calm down?"Sending out the troops means that the little green plastic soldiers , led by ( voice : ) , lower the baby monitor to the first floor and hide with it in a potted plant , where they can observe the opening of the gifts and report back to the toys in 's room . At first , the presents seem nonthreatening   a lunchbox , bed sheets ( " who invited that kid ? " wonders ) , a game . But 's mom pulls a surprise present from the closet . 's very excited about it , but before they hear what it is , knocks the speaker off the table and the batteries fall out . Sarge warns that the kids are headed upstairs , but the toys barely have time to resume their previous positions before the stampede thunders in . One of the kids ( ? ) sweeps off the bed , saying " make a space , this is where the spaceship lands ! " They put something down where was , then 's mom calls them back down to play games and suddenly the room is empty again . The toys creep out of their hiding places to see the new toy , pausing in surprise when crawls out from under the bed . The new toy has taken 's place on the bed , which causes consternation . Woody reminds them that no one is being replaced , and they look up to see what 's on the bed . It 's ( voice : ) , space ranger , unit . believes he 's crash landed on a strange planet on the way to sector 12 , and his ship ( his box ) is damaged . Woody welcomes to 's room and tries to explain that has landed in 's usual spot . The other toys climb up on the bed to meet and ask him about the buttons and gadgets on his space suit . They 're impressed with 's voice recordings   " a quality sound system "   not like 's pull - string - activated voice , which " sounds like a car ran over it . " also has a laser ( " a little light bulb that blinks , " grumbles ) , and wings . takes exception to being called a toy , and when says he ca n't really fly , climbs the bedpost , shouts " to infinity and beyond ! " , and dives . He bounces off a rubber ball , does a loop - de - loop on the racetrack , and gets stuck for a few rotations on the toy plane tethered to the ceiling before flipping down and landing neatly back on the bed . All the toys are dazzled except , who says " that was n't flying , that was falling with style!"In the montage that follows ( soundtrack : 's " Strange Things Are Happening to Me " ) , has shoot , then puts on a cardboard replica of 's helmet and wings . A western - themed poster in 's room is replaced by two posters , and drawings of on the bulletin board are covered with drawings of . The western - style bedspread disappears ; the new one is emblazoned with 's image and his name . In the final indignity , takes to bed and leaves in the covered wagon toy chest . Some alarming noises draw the toys to the open window , where they can see the neighbor kid , ( voice : ) , who 's about to blow up a action figure . 's dog , a brown and white terrier , is tied up nearby and barking like crazy . thinks , who 's laughing maniacally , is " a happy child ; " the others explain that he tortures toys . wants to help the doomed toy soldier , but lights the fuse and 's toys duck as debris goes flying . When they look again , there 's no sign of . " The sooner we move , the better , " says . 's mom suggests dinner at ( a space - themed restaurant ) and tells he can bring one toy . Doubting that will choose him unless is unavailable , plans to trap in a gap behind 's desk . The plan backfires and falls out the window into the bushes below . The other toys accuse of pushing out the window out of jealousy , but as they are about to punish him , returns . Failing to find , he grabs and the family drives off   but not before crawls out of his bush and climbs on the back of the minivan . While 's mother refuels the car at a station , Woody wonders how he can convince the other toys that 's fall was an accident . Suddenly appears . is delighted , though more for his own sake than 's ( " I 'm saved ! " ) , but is very bitter over what did to him . The two fight and roll out of the car , which drives off and leaves them stranded . Luckily , sees another vehicle heading for and knows that they can meet there . He tricks into coming with him ( but only because if he came home without , the other toys would attack him ) . insists on riding in the " cockpit " ( the front seat ) so he can wear a seatbelt ; climbs in the back and gets thrown about by the driver 's erratic maneuvers . They reach and hide in discarded food packaging so they can sneak through the front door . Woody quickly spots the , but climbs into a claw - crane machine shaped like a spaceship , thinking it 's the ship home promised him . The machine is filled with three - eyed green aliens ( voices : , ) who believe the claw is a god . Woody climbs in to get out , but and are captured by , along with one of the little aliens . Sid takes them back to his house and immediately gives the three - eyed alien to , who starts chewing on it . Then takes a doll away from his little sister ( voice : ) and runs upstairs to operate on her . ( " No one 's ever attempted a double - bypass brain transplant before ! " ) and , still in 's backpack , look on in horror as replaces the doll 's head with the head of a toy pterodactyl and gleefully gives it back to , who shrieks for her mother and runs away . follows . Woody tries to get out of 's room , but the door 's locked . He 's frightened by 's nightmarish mutant toys , which has butchered and reconstructed a . There 's an erector - set spider with a one - eyed baby head , a jack - in - the - box whose jack has been replaced by a green rubber hand , a fishing pole with legs , and other horrors . thinks they 're cannibals . Meanwhile , 's toys are searching for from 's window . They have to stop when the car pulls into the driveway . ca n't find and many of the toys think he ran away , which they interpret as evidence of his guilt . But hopes he 's ok . Next morning , Sid interrogates Woody about the location of a " rebel base . " When remains silent , uses a magnifying glass to concentrate the sunlight on a spot between 's eyebrows , which starts to smoke . Woody is saved when is called away to eat his Pop - tarts . compliments for not succumbing to 's torture . Woody notices that has left the door open , but before he and get out , the mutant toys block the way . tries his laser on them and is puzzled when it does n't work . Woody pushes the button that activates 's karate - chop action and frog - marches him through the crowd of toys , which parts to let them through . Woody drops as soon as they reach the door and runs down the stairs saying " there 's no place like home , there 's no place like home , " a la in ( the landing , he finds , scary even in his sleep . He backs up , then grabs him and leads him down the hall past the head of the stairs . But the ring on 's pull - string catches on the wrought - iron stair railing , and he says ( involuntarily ) " - ! , partner   we got to get this wagon train a - movin ! " Of course the dog wakes up and comes to investigate . says " Split up ! " and runs through an open door ; Woody pulls another door closed behind him . sees someone asleep in a recliner and notices that the television is on . A voice is saying " Come in , ! This is ! " At first thinks is really trying to reach him , and fiddles with the radio on his suit . But as the commercial enumerates his features and adds a disclaimer that is not a flying toy , begins to believe that he really is , as keeps telling him , only a child 's plaything . He 's despondent . Then he spots an open window in the stairwell ( apparently nobody in this neighborhood bothers with window screens ) and tries to prove himself wrong by flying through it . He bounces off the stairs and lands in the hall , losing an arm in the process ( soundtrack : 's " I Will Go Sailing No picks up and carries him off to her room , where finds him playing the part of at a tea party . ( " What a lovely hat , . It goes quite well with your head . " ) imitates 's mother 's voice to lure out of the room so he can rescue . is raving and depressed , but when he wails that he ca n't even fly out the window , it gives an idea . He opens the window in 's room and calls over to 's room , where is beating at . Most of the toys seem glad to see him . He tosses a string of lights across and tells them to tie it to something , but says " How 'bout we do n't ? " and tries to convince the other toys that they should leave where he is . tells them is with him , but wo n't come to the window where the toys in 's room can see him , though he does throw his detached arm . Woody uses the arm to make the toys think is standing next to him , but eventually slips up and they see that the arm is n't attached to . They react pretty much the way people would react to a severed human arm , with horror and disgust . They let go of the string of lights , which falls to the ground . When begs them to listen , they leave the window , except for , who closes the blinds . Woody cries . Down on the floor , 's mutant toys have surrounded . When tries to drive them off , the baby - headed spider comes at him and takes away 's arm . Woody ca n't break through the group around , but he 's sure they 're killing him until the crowd of toys breaks up and reveals with his arm re - attached . " But they 're cannibals , " says ; " we saw them eat those other toys " ... then he looks at 's toys again , and notices that 's doll and the pterodactyl have their own heads back . Realizing he s misjudged them , he 's trying to apologize when they all disappear under the bed and comes back . has a rocket . His first thought is to use it on , but 's hiding , so he picks up instead . " I 've always wanted to put a space man into orbit , " he says malevolently . A rainstorm forces him to delay the rocket launch until morning . Next door , it 's 's bedtime and he 's mourning the loss of his two favorite toys . His mom comes in and says she 's looked everywhere , and all she can find is his hat , which she gives him . ( This is the white - laced red cowboy hat that looks like the had worn by , a character we meet in the next movie . ) 's mom reassures him that they 'll find and before they move out   tomorrow . That night , convinces that even if he 's not a space ranger , life as 's toy is still worth living , though himself despairs that he 'll ever be 's favorite toy again . regains his spirit in time to see the moving truck pull up to 's house . But before they can escape , Sid wakes up and takes ( still strapped to the rocket ) out into the back yard . He starts working on something ominous with a big empty water jug while doing newscaster - style narration of the preparations for the approaching rocket launch . Woody pleads with the mutant toys to help him rescue and they hesitantly join him . ( None of 's toys talk . ) Woody outlines a plan and assigns tasks to each toy . Ducky and go into the heating ducts to avoid , who saw trying to follow and is still growling outside the bedroom door . and get outside by removing the light fixture on the front porch , then ring the doorbell . When he hears the doorbell , releases a wind - up frog from 's room ; the frog scoots under and zooms down the hall . gives chase and follows the frog downstairs , where 's answering the door . The frog goes out , grabs it , and they 're both reeled up by ( who 's part fishing pole ) before catches up . , exasperated , shuts the door , leaving outside . The porch light fixture drops back into place before anyone notices it 's gone . As soon as 's out of the front hall , and his cadre of toys come down the stairs , roll through the kitchen , and exit through the cat flap in the back door . They land in the bushes , where they have a good view of the launch site . 's newscaster voice is asking his mission control voice if launch pad construction is complete ; mission control says it is . Sid himself is out of sight , apparently rummaging around in the shed looking for matches . , , and the wind - up frog pop out of a down - spout as prepares to start the count - down . The launch pad looks very strange . and his rocket are standing on a board on a milk crate . Nearby is an orange - striped traffic horse with a rake leaning on it and the empty water jug propped underneath . The jug is connected with vacuum - cleaner hose to a red funnel , which is aimed at 's feet . Woody approaches , who 's happy to see him and asks for help getting loose . says " Everything 's under control , " and falls to the ground in the manner of a toy expecting a human on the scene . Sure enough , comes out of the shed using his mission control voice ( " all systems are go , requesting permission to launch " )   and then notices . He tosses on the charcoal grill and says " You and I can have a cookout later . " He puts a match in 's holster and turns back to his rocket launch , where he lights another match and starts counting down from 10 . While he 's focused on this , toys are taking up positions all around the yard . Before can light 's fuse , 's voice recordings start playing , one after another : " Reach for the sky ! This town ai n't big enough for the two of us ! Somebody 's poisoned the waterhole ! " is distracted and comes over to pick up off the grill . His string has n't been pulled . 's busted ! " he says disgustedly . "Who are you ' busted , buster ? " says . " That 's right , I 'm talking to you , . We do n't like being blown up , . " Sid begins to look terrified . " ... or smashed , or ripped apart , " continues . - we ? " Sid stutters . "That 's right ! " replies . " Your toys ! " A rag doll climbs out of the sandbox and walks across the yard saying " - ... . " A large toy pickup truck emerges from a pile of sand while a couple of partially dismembered soldier action figures rise out of a puddle . They all advance on , who backs away and jumps when the three - eyed alien from pops out from under 's red water bowl . Sid backs toward the clothes line and the baby - headed spider drops down on his head . He shrieks and shakes it off , but the toys have him surrounded now . says , " You must take good care of your toys , because if you do n't , we 'll find out , . We toys can see everything ! " 's head spins all the way around ( think ( 1973 ) ) . " So play nice . is panic - stricken . He screams , throws in the air , and runs into the house , where he tells the toys are alive . When he sees the doll she 's carrying , he says " nice toy , " and backs away . She waves the doll at him . He screams again and runs upstairs crying ; she chases him . Outside , and other toys are celebrating . " We did it ! " As thanks , they hear a honk from next door . 's mom tells the kids to say goodbye to their old house and the minivan starts to move . Woody and rush over and climbs on the back of the car , but , still burdened with the rocket , ca n't get through the fence . He tells he 'll catch up , but comes back for him . They manage to get on the back of the moving van , but runs after them and gets hold of 's leg . Woody ca n't hold on to the truck and tells to take care of for him . , sacrificing himself to save , jumps on 's head , making him let go of . Woody climbs back on the truck and pries open the cargo door as the truck comes to a stoplight . Woody pulls out , the remote controlled car , and sends him to get , who 's under a parked car where ca n't reach him . The toys in the think is murdering another toy and try to stop him . This is a problem because 's controlling . The angry toys pick up and , the strong - man , spins him around , which causes to drive in circles around ( who 's still barking furiously ) . They throw against a box ; 's path straightens out . jumps on . , with still precariously aboard , approaches a busy intersection . The traffic light is not in their favor . RC scoots under a moving car , but two other cars collide while trying to avoid . The wrecked cars cut the dog off from his quarry and pulls away . On the truck , tries to tell the toys that is out there and they have to save him , but is n't buying it . " Toss him overboard , " he says , and they do   but holds on to 's controller . sweeps off his feet and turns up to turbo so they can catch up to the moving truck . ( voice : ) , the binoculars , notices and his passengers gaining on them and alerts the other toys . confirms that is there   " was telling the truth!""What have we done ? " wail the toys . tells to lower the truck 's cargo ramp . stretches out and is able to grab his paw just as 's batteries begin to lose strength . In the ' car , they 're listening to " . " Molly can see in the side mirror and laughs , but she ca n't talk , so no one else notices . is swerving dangerously . , stretched past his limit , loses his grip and coughs to a stop in the middle of the road as the moving disappears in the distance . Then remembers he still has a rocket strapped to his back , and Woody remembers he still has the match put in his holster . He strikes it and is about to light 's fuse when the wind of a passing car puts out the match . Despair . But when 's hand starts to smoke , he realizes that 's helmet concentrates the sunlight just as 's magnifying glass did . They use it to light the fuse . The rocket catches them up to the truck and lifts them off the ground . As they go by drops , who lands in the truck . and go straight up with the rocket . opens his wings , which apparently break the tape holding him to the rocket , and zooms downward . He 's still clutching , who says " , you 're flying!""This is n't flying , this is falling with style ! " retorts , repeating 's earlier line . They pass the truck again and fall through the minivan 's sunroof , landing neatly in the box next to , who finds them and gleefully tells his mom . She assumes they 've been in the car the whole time . On at the new house , , , and their mom are gathered around the tree . The army men are hiding in the tree with the baby monitor ; the other toys are in 's room gathered around the speaker . pulls Woody under some mistletoe ( held by her sheep ) and kisses him . 's bed still sports a bedspread , but one of the pillowcases and the comforter at the foot of the bed are western style . Drawings of are again prominent on the bulletin board . There are two posters , but also a cowboy poster . Balance and harmony reign . All the toys seem happy and relaxed ; instead of fretting that might get another dinosaur , hopes for a leaf - eater so he can play the dominant predator . The first report comes in from : 's first present is a , to 's delight . He says he 'd better shave and yanks off his mustache . , a bit lipstick - stained and woozy , joins on 's bed . They 're still friends . Sarge announces that 's opening his first present , but there 's a burst of static and whacks the speaker a few times . asks if he 's worried and denies it , then says , " Are you?""Now , " Woody teases , " what could possibly get that is worse than they hear a bark downstairs , and 's joyous cry of " wow , a puppy ! " and exchange nervous smiles . The credits roll to the reprise of " You 've Got a in Me , " a duet featuring and Lovett.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The story takes place in , ( ) works as a clown - for - hire for a company called 's . He struggles with severe depression personally but finds some form of optimism in performing for others and trying to make people laugh . He is tasked with advertising a store by dancing and waving a sign around . On one such occasion , the sign gets snatched by a group of punk teens , forcing to chase them into an alley . They smash the sign against his face and proceed to mercilessly kick him while he 's down . In this era , is struggling with crime , unemployment , and poverty . visits a social worker for his medication , as well as his ongoing mental health issues . On the bus ride home , a small child looks at . He makes silly faces that amuse the boy , but his mother tells to leave him alone . begins to laugh hysterically and uncontrollably . When the mother questions him , he hands her a card that explains that he has a mental condition that causes him to laugh the way that he does . returns home to a high - rise apartment project , where he lives with his ailing mother , ( ) . After dinner , they sit and watch a TV talk show with host ( ) . imagines himself being on the show and getting 's attention . In his fantasy , charms the audience and by telling them that he takes care of his mother . relates to and invites him up on stage in front of everyone , where they share a familial embrace . It is revealed that used to work for ( ) and is obsessed with the millionaire and has been currently writing to him to try and better their living situation . At - 's , is given a gun for protection by his co - worker ( ) after he hears about the mugging incident . is both reluctant and relieved to receive such a gift as firearms are outlawed at work but soon finds his confidence growing after receiving the weapon . However , soon after this , he is confronted by his cold and unfeeling boss , who reprimands him for losing the sign and takes the cost of it out of his pay . responds only by smiling bitterly . meets and becomes infatuated with one of his neighbors , a single mother named ( ) . She speaks to him politely about relating issues that he can relate to . However , while trying to make an impression with her , he appears awkward and weird around her . At one point , he spends his day following her . Later , she comes by his apartment and asks if he was following her , and he admits that he was , but she does n't seem put off by it . He invites her to a stand - up comedy show that he is performing at . She is hesitant but is won over by his charm and sense of humor . watches comedians perform to help him gain some insight into the craft , but feels more awkward and out of place as his over - the - top laughter is not genuine . goes to the comedy club for his performance . His nervousness consumes him and , as a coping mechanism , unintentionally finds himself laughing so hard that he can barely speak . He then begins going off into his routine , which is n't very funny . appears to be in the audience ... the only person who is laughing at 's jokes . This gives him the comfort he needs to continue to joke despite his inner torment and turmoil . later goes to a children 's hospital to entertain them as a clown . He brought his gun with him , and it falls out on the floor . 's boss later chews him out for this . pleads for a second chance , but his boss refuses and fires him on the spot . To top things off , throws under the bus by claiming that got the gun himself . On the subway train ride home from - 's in full clown getup , spots three drunk young types working for harassing a woman . starts laughing unintentionally and draws the attention of the men , while the woman wisely flees from that car . The men approach and mock him and his laughter before they start to beat him . fights back in self - defense , but they team up , and relentlessly beat him to the floor . Having had enough , then pulls out his gun and shoots two of them dead in self - defense before following the last guy out of the train and murdering him on the stairs . In shock over what he just did , retreats into a nearby public men 's room . After a moment of frantic contemplation , he finds a force rising within him , and he begins to dance by himself . At this moment , he sees himself in the dirty mirror as a battered and smeared and yet powerful clown and begins to embrace it . He hides the gun and then returns to the apartment building where he meets and kisses for the first time . The news of the three murders spreads , with some seeing it as an attack on the wealthy , while others support the act . speaks out and condemns it , labeling the lower class as " clowns , " which becomes a symbol they readily embrace . The next day , cleans out his locker at 's but not before confronting about betraying him and breaking the time punching machine . He then leaves , feeling high - spirited and free . News reports show clown rioters protesting through the city and wreaking trouble , condemning the higher privileged . sees that he has inadvertently caused this and begins to see his true potential , which makes him genuinely delighted . later finds one of 's letters to , which indicates that is ' son . goes to , where he meets young ( - ) . After performing a magic trick for , he sticks his hands through the gate and forces to smile , realizing deep within that they may or may not be brothers . However , ( ) comes to intervene and tell to leave . mentions his mother and her involvement with . says he remembers , but that she was lying to him . attacks and nearly strangles through the bars but then notices that is watching . then gets hold of himself and flees the premises . That evening , finds at a public art theater event . infiltrates the theater by impersonating an usher . He follows into a men 's room and tries to confront him with the potential of him being his father . mentions , whom also remembers . While also acknowledges that used to work for him as part of his housekeeping staff , he says that she was delusional and that there 's no way could be his son . also explains that never told that he was adopted , which strongly rejects before uncontrollably laughing in 's face . , unaware of 's condition , becomes defensive and punches in the face before having him thrown out of the building . returns home , where he tortures himself by slamming his head on the refrigerator in a fit of depression and longing . The next day , two police detectives , ( ) and ( ) , go to 's apartment to question him on the subway murders due to the word that the suspect was wearing clown make - up , and they know lost his job earlier that day . denies any involvement and gets the detectives to leave . Not long after , falls ill and is hospitalized . sits by as he tends to his mother . In the hospital , sees that 's TV show is playing a clip from his stand - up routine , but he is hurt to see that only played it to mock . later receives a phone call from a rep for 's show . He is invited to appear as a guest , which reluctantly accepts . After studying other interviews on the comedy show , decides to commit suicide in front of the live audience , thinking it will make them laugh . Seeking hard proof , goes to and speaks to a clerk , named ( ) , who has a file on . When says he ca n't give the info he wants , snatches the file and runs away to read it . Once away and hidden in a stairwell , opens the documents and reads them , finding that was telling the truth ... according to the documents . The reality is that adopted after he was found abandoned as a baby , and she abused him , tying him to a radiator and beating him alongside her abusive boyfriend . One part of the file mentions having a head injury , which is most likely what caused his laughing condition . returns to the hospital and tells that he thought his life was a tragedy , but he sees it 's a " fucking comedy . " With that , he smothers to death . goes back home and breaks into 's apartment . She sees him and is terrified , asking him to leave for the sake of her daughter . asks her if she has ever had " a really bad day , " to which she replies that she does n't even know him . Through this , it is revealed that every other moment featuring was just in 's head . A broken and apologizes for his intrusion and leaves alone , storming out of her apartment . starts to get ready for his appearance on 's show and paints his face white . He is visited in his apartment by and another former co - worker , a dwarf named ( ) . They offer condolences after they hear about 's death , but then begins mentioning and going to their apartments to question them about the subway murders . realizes that is only seeking a way to use in order to cover his own butt and then snaps , brutally stabbing twice in the face before smashing his head against the wall . A terrified questions 's deeds and begs to be let go . agrees to before playfully scaring him as a prank . tries to undo the lock on 's door but is unable to due to his height . He asks to open the door for him to which immediately agrees , pausing once to thank for being the only person in his life who was nice to him . kisses on the forehead and lets him go . then dyes his hair green , puts on full clown make - up , and dons a burgundy suit . He then dances down the stairways , fully embracing his insanity and carefree life . and find dancing in the street and move in to arrest him . runs , and they chase him into the subway train where dozens of other citizens are dressed like clowns after being inspired by the murders . hides his face with a clown mask , which he steals from a protester and inadvertently starts a brawl in the train cars . As the detectives pursue , one clown gets in the way , and accidentally shoots him dead when they struggle with his gun . The clowns pull the detectives out of the subway and start beating them relentlessly , allowing to get away , moving smoothly through the police forces which swarm the area . At the TV station , meets and his agent ( ) . Before he goes on , asks to introduce him as " , " since referred to him as such when playing his clip . asks if his clown make - up has political agendas behind it to which replies , " I do n't believe in that . I do n't believe in anything . " While waiting to be introduced , sees broadcasting a clip of a struggling trying to tell a joke . This causes 's mind and plans to change , and then he dances out into the spotlight . goes out as the show begins . He awkwardly tells a joke , which he finds funny for its dark humor though nobody else does . After being confronted with this , continues by admitting to the subway murders . and the audience slowly realize that is serious . argues that the audience only cares for the victims because spoke for them , but anyone else like would be ignored and walked over . and the audience grow angrier with , but so does he . scolds , which escalates into snapping and telling another joke , grinning giddily . " What do you get when you cross a mentally ill loner with a society that abandons him and treats him like trash ? ! " he asks , only for to try shutting him off before calling for the police . An enraged then screams , " You get what you fucking ' deserve ! " before blowing 's brains out in front of everyone . The audience runs away in terror , and the news of the murder immediately hits the airwaves . then laughs genuinely for the first time in his life . is now overrun by rioting citizens dressed as clowns after hearing about what did . The leave a movie theater to find the chaos in the streets . takes his wife ( ) and into an alley , but one clown follows them and tells he is getting what he deserves using the punchline that used on the show . With that , he shoots and dead in front of . Meanwhile , has been arrested and is being taken by the police . looks out the window and laughs gleefully as he sees the destruction and chaos he has caused . Just then , the clowns in an ambulance run into the car , killing the cops and freeing , who is injured and unconscious . When he awakes , finds himself surrounded by a mob of cheering mobsters in clown masks . The rioters then cheer on as he stands on a car and embraces their admiration , now that he has gotten the recognition he has long desired . He dances to their cheering and then pauses , finding that his nose is bleeding profusely . He then spreads the blood across his upper lip and grins before standing before them , elevated like a god . Sometime later , is locked up in . He laughs after telling this story and visualizes a young standing over his parents in the alley . Realizing that he has , in a way , turned into himself , laughs some more , finding this genuinely hilarious . He meets a new social worker ( ) and says he wants to tell her a joke , but she would n't get it . A few minutes later , then steps out of the room , leaving a trail of bloody footprints behind before he is chased around by > 

 < synopsis > In 1280 , " Longshanks " invades and conquers following the death of of , who left no heir to the throne . witnesses Longshanks ' treachery , survives the deaths of his father and brother , and is taken abroad on a pilgrimage throughout by his paternal , where he is educated . Years later , grants his noblemen land and privileges in , including . Meanwhile , a grown returns to and falls in love with his childhood friend , and the two marry in secret . rescues from being raped by English soldiers , but as she fights off their second attempt , is captured and publicly executed . In retribution , leads his clan to slaughter the English garrison in his hometown and send the occupying garrison at back to . Longshanks orders his son to stop by any means necessary . Wallace rebels against the , and as his legend spreads , hundreds of from the surrounding clans join him . leads his army to victory at the of and then destroys the city of , killing ' nephew and sending his severed head to the king . seeks the assistance of the , the son of the and a contender for the Scottish crown . is dominated by his father , who wishes to secure the throne for his son by submitting to the . Worried by the threat of the rebellion , sends his son 's wife of to try to negotiate with as a distraction for the landing of another invasion force in . After meeting him in person , becomes enamored of . Warned of the coming invasion by , implores the Scottish nobility to take immediate action to counter the threat and take back the country . Leading the English army himself , confronts the at where noblemen and , having been bribed by , betray , causing the to lose the battle . As charges toward the departing Longshanks on horseback , he is intercepted by one of the king 's lancers , who turns out to be the , but filled with remorse , gets to safety before the can capture him . kills and for their betrayal , and wages a guerrilla war against the for the next seven years , assisted by , with whom he eventually has an affair . sets up a meeting with in , but 's father has conspired with other nobles to capture and hand over to the . Learning of his treachery , disowns his father . Isabella exacts revenge on the now terminally ill Longshanks by telling him that his bloodline will be destroyed upon his death as she is now pregnant with 's child . In , is brought before an English magistrate , tried for high treason , and condemned to public torture and beheading . Even whilst being hanged , drawn and quartered , refuses to submit to the king . As cries for mercy come from the watching crowd deeply moved by the 's valor , the magistrate offers him one final chance , asking him only to utter the word , " " , and be granted a quick death . instead shouts , " Freedom ! " , and the judge orders his death . Moments before being decapitated , sees a vision of in the crowd , smiling at him . In 1314 , , now 's king , leads a Scottish army before a ceremonial line of English troops on the fields of , where he is to formally accept English rule . As he begins to ride toward the , he stops and invokes 's memory , imploring his men to fight with him as they did with . then leads his army into battle against the stunned , winning the their freedom.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The movie opens with a title card noting that 40,000 went out on submarines in , and that 30,000 never came back . In of 1941 the German - Boat fleet is a mere 12 subs and the German campaign to rule the is turning against them . Three officers of are driving down a dark road by the shores of , . Enlisted sailors are drunk and hanging out on the road . They harass the officers in a fairly obnoxious way , including urinating on their car as it goes by . The officers ( including , as you soon find out , the ) take this in stride . The next scene is in a raucous beer hall . It is an award banquet for a sub captain ( ) , who just received a commendation , as well as a sending off for 's crew . Various scenes of debauchery play out . The officers are just a bunch of rowdy kids having fun . 's ( ) looks on calmly . The is then introduced to a party reporter , ( ) who will be accompanying them on their next tour to report on the greatness of the 's sub crews . They meet the 's chief engineer and de facto second - in - command " The Chief " , ( ) , who is older and obviously does n't look forward to another tour . His wife is ill back home and he leaves to call about her . is brought out , looking very inebriated and supported by two officers . They note sadly that all the crews these days are just kids , and that the old guard is almost gone . At the podium , gives a speech full of what comes very close to anti - Nazi rhetoric ( a couple guys in the audience , possibly men , look tense ) , but ends it on a positive note without saying anything too incriminating , obscenely praising their for his courageous stance against and . is found in the 's room , even more inebriated than before and having vomited on the floor . The , & the report to in the shipyards of , . The addresses his assembled crew and introduces them to . Of most note are the first lieutenant ( ) , a prissy young hardcore , and the second lieutenant ( ) who is a clever jokester and constantly winds up the first lieutenant . , the reporter , is led to the junior officer 's bunks where he finds out that even the officers have to share beds because of space constraints . is ribbed by ( ) , another jokester , and befriends a very young officer , , with a French girlfriend back home who he constantly writes letters to . You also get your first shot of , the head of the engine room , a pale , gangly fellow whom the crew members call " The Ghost" . The crew experience the drudgery of regular drills . snaps pictures of everything in sight initially , but gradually calms down . The crew goes about their day to day business with increasing dreariness , all of them except the first lieutenant stop shaving and grow beards , and their moil is only broken by a false alarm arranged by the to keep them on their toes . During this time you learn that the has no love for the , and morale amongst the higher officers seems abysmal . The at one point decides to see how deep the sub can dive . The gauge limits the " safe " zone down to only 170 meters , but the , much to the chagrin of the crew , takes it down to almost 200 . This causes ominous creaking noises to emit from the hull , and everyone is relieved when the orders the sub back up . After more boredom , the sub receives a transmission that a convoy has been spotted . The crew leaps at the opportunity to go after them , but the says they have no chance of getting there in time and so they go back to the boredom of waiting for better news . Shortly thereafter , they get a message about a convoy that they will be able to intercept , and the kicks the sub into full gear to catch it . They approach the convoy in very heavy fog , but before they can even get close enough to see anything one of the escort destroyers spots them and the sub has to dive . After being depth charged repeatedly by the destroyer but taking no real damage , the manages to lose them and escape . The notes that the British destroyers are getting smarter , and that they no longer make mistakes . The crew is totally demoralised since they did n't even get close to sinking a ship and barely escaped with their lives , but still remain in fairly good spirits . sits in the middle of the boredom of the crew . Half the crew ends up with crabs . They randomly run into one of the other eleven subs in the , which is a brief happy interlude , followed by the being annoyed at the horrible planning and navigation that resulted in 1/6 of the fleet being in the same spot for no good reason . A new transmission is received that there is a large convoy spotted and that several other subs are already converging on it . They decide to go for it too , and this time they approach the convoy unnoticed and fire several torpedoes at two of the freighters , landing direct hits . While they are launching the torpedoes they spot a destroyer in the distance , but do n't think it will cause a problem . However , after launching the last of the torpedoes the ca n't see the destroyer in the periscope any more . When he finally does see it , it is rapidly coming straight for them . They dive quickly and manage to get far enough away that the depth charges do n't cause any damage . They hear the torpedoes hit , and are quite happy until the first dreadful ping of the destroyer 's ( British sonar ) system sounds . The sub sits there with the pings getting closer and louder , the destroyer approaching , unable to do much besides hope it does n't notice them . It does notice them , though , and starts depth charging them like mad . You see a shot of wedged under some machinery , holding his head in his hands and looking freaked out and miserable . The manages to evade the destroyer , only to have a second destroyer come at them from a different direction . Left with no choice , the orders them to dive VERY deep , well into the zone on their depth gauge . The water pressure causes bolts to start popping inwards , damaging equipment and wounding a crewmember . At this point , now totally out of his mind , stumbles onto the bridge babbling incoherently . The orders him back to his post , but just lurches towards him . The moves away and eventually the other officers are able to get out . As he winds himself down , the sets aside a pistol he 'd quickly grabbed to deal with 's breakdown . Finally all signs of the destroyers fade , and the sub remains under water for six more hours just to be safe . It then surfaces to find that one of the ships it torpedoed was an oil tanker , which is now surrounded by burning oil but has n't sunk . The orders another torpedo fired at it to finish the job . As this torpedo hits , the sub crew is able to see that there are still survivors on the tanker . The is incensed that in six hours no one came to rescue them . The survivors swim towards the sub , but the sadly orders them to move away . The crew who witness this , particularly , are very distressed . Running low on supplies and fuel , the crew expects that they are now to dock at , . Instead they are given grim orders : they are to secretly dock with an undercover German supply ship at , a neutral Spanish port . top - secret communique is received and decoded : will not return to but instead make the crossing of the - controlled of into the to reach the Italian coastal town of . The knows that this is essentially a suicide mission since the of is one of the most heavily defended Allied naval zones in the world , and he arranges for and The ( whose wife is very ill ) to leave the sub at the Spanish port and make their way back to . does n't want to go , but the insists that he 's already been in too much danger . agrees to take the junior officer 's love letters ( there are dozens of them ) to his French girlfriend . comes to the and apologises for leaving his post , insisting that it wo n't happen again and begging the to not court - martial him . The is hesitant , but eventually accepts 's apology and sends him off . They make it to and the secret supply ship , the " " , turns out to be fantastically well - appointed . The officers go aboard and are treated like heroes by the fawning crew . The officers are sullen and do not take kindly to the princely treatment . They are even more annoyed by the ship 's crew begging them to tell their exciting stories . The 's face and voice become haunted when he talks about their latest run and nearly being destroyed during the heavy depth - charging they received . In the midst of the temporary respite the receives a telegram from headquarters . Leave for and The has been denied . They have to stay with the ship til the end . The is visibly upset , but says that it 's a good thing since his replacement would be some incompetent kid . is conflicted , but definitely unhappy about having to give the junior officer back his love letters . The ship is resupplied and they go on their way . The sub stops away from the of to take stock of things . They can see a fleet of British warships patrolling the narrow gap between the cliffs . The , for lack of a better idea , decides that they will make a silent run towards the gap , then dive deep at the last minute and hope that the tide can help them drift under the enemy fleet . No one , including the himself , seems to put much stock in this plan . When the time is right , they begin their run towards the . Unfortunately , considering advances in naval technology , they are immediately spotted ; a British fighter plane immediately begins strafing the sub and releasing a direct hit with a bomb . Shots from the ships begin exploding around them . The and navigator ( who is badly shot up ) head back into the sub , which immediately starts diving . Unfortunately , due to the damage from the bomb the sub is unable to pull out of the dive . It goes deeper and deeper , past the point that the bolts start blowing out again and horrible noises come from the hull . The pressure causes several pipes to burst and parts of the sub start flooding . The sub eventually comes to a rest on a rock at about 280 meters down , well beyond the limit of the depth gauge . The sub is flooding badly and its engines are n't working . Meanwhile , the navigator is bleeding to death and the doctor is desperately trying to keep him alive . The crew frantically begins to patch up the damage and stop the water from flooding the entire sub . Amidst the chaos of people madly jamming whatever they can into the leaks , heroically dives into a deep flood puddle to find and jam the source of a major leak . The Chief shimmies under floor panels to replace a bunch of damaged batteries , braving the noxious fumes created by the spilled battery acid . As the leaks stop and the navigator stabilizes , the and the assess their situation . There is much damage to fix , and all the water needs to be bailed out , and if all goes perfectly they might have one shot at surfacing . They are also short on oxygen and need to do everything quickly so they do n't run out . The crew goes about bailing the massive amount of water , bucket - brigade style , into the bilge where it will be blown out when they try to surface . The continues his repairs . After hours the water is all bailed and the crew is utterly exhausted from the effort . Oxygen is critically low . The orders all men not on immediate duty to go to their bunks and relax , while the continues his repairs . In their bunks , the sleeping men wear small oxygen masks to save air . The crew is all collapsed about the sub , oxygen deprived and resigned to death . Even the despairs and blames his own recklessness for the crew 's fate . The finishes repairs , however , and believes that they still have a chance . The and the Chief resolve to give it a try . They blow their ballast and slowly start rising . Johann fires the engines and , amazingly , they start and work . They surface and everyone takes ecstatic breaths of fresh air . On top of the observation tower , the yells joyously that they can escape since the presumed they were all dead . The sub limps back to . Droves of people are out to greet them , and the tired mariners get a heroes ' welcome . They look exhausted but happy that they made it . Suddenly , an air raid siren sounds . warplanes swoop in , gunning and bombing everyone and everything in sight , including . and the Chief manage to make it into a shelter along with a few of the sub 's crew . After the planes leave goes out to survey the damage . Most of the crew is dead . The corpses of , the second lieutenant , , and others lay on the pier . Finally comes to the , who is still standing ... but a trickle of blood flows from his mouth and he slowly collapses . looks on , horrified . The lives just long enough to see sink from sight . The camera zooms out of the scene , with holding the dead Captain.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > In the opening , is teaching his daughter archery on his secluded farm while his wife prepares a picnic lunch for them . Suddenly , 's daughter vanishes and the rest of 's family disintegrates , along with half of all life across the universe , the result of ' snapping his fingers after acquiring all six . and are stranded in space following their defeat by on , but are returned to by and reunited with , , , , , and . The team formulates a plan to steal the back from and use them to reverse his actions , but learn upon finding him that he had used the stones a second time to destroy them , preventing their further use . He tells the remaining that he did so to avoid using the for further nefarious purposes . Enraged , beheads , saying it 's what he should have done in . Five years later , escapes from the quantum realm to discover that his daughter is now a teenager and that , along with half of the population , has disappeared in the snap . Rogers has been leading grief counseling sessions for survivors still struggling with the effects of the snap , while is tirelessly keeping watch over both and the rest of the universe with the help of , , , , and . goes to and , and explains that while five years had passed for them , only five hours had passed for him in the quantum realm and that time stretches much differently there . The three go to , who is now raising a child with , and explain their theory that the quantum realm can be used to go back in time and steal the before is able to collect them . initially rejects their proposal with concern about risking his family and the peace he has found , but after reflecting upon the loss of decides to test theoretical models that would work with 's quantum tunnel , eventually finding one that works . With now on board the remaining set out to reassemble their team . has now embraced the as a part of him , and has melded his own consciousness and the 's together into one . , after hearing reports from of an assassin that operates with similar methods to , leaves to find him . , consumed with grief after the loss of his family , has been operating under the mantle " " while brutally massacring criminal cartels and gangs around the world in order to try and improve the world that 's still left . finds him in and after some convincing , he agrees to rejoin the team in order to try and bring his family back . and go to the small town of , where and the last survivors of have settled . They there find , who has become overwhelmed by guilt over failing to kill in . Thor has become overweight , his hair and beard are overgrown , and he spends his free time eating junk food , getting drunk , and playing with his friends and . begrudgingly agrees to return to the after some convincing from and . After testing the quantum time machine on , who confirms that it works , The are reunited with a plan - , , , and embark to retrieve the , , and Space stones during the battle of in 2012 . goes to the , where he is informed by the that taking the from her time line would prevent 's future efforts to stop from destroying the laws of nature . However , when tells her that gave up the willingly to , she allows to have it , implying had intended for a specific sequence of events to occur for to be defeated . also promises the stones ' return to their proper time lines in order to prevent any ill effects . and attempt to steal the after the confiscate it from . gives 's past self a mild cardiac arrest by pulling a circuit in his artificial heart , while steals the briefcase housing the when nobody is looking . Their plan is thwarted when drops the briefcase after he is accidentally hit by the . then steals the and uses it to escape custody . Rogers succeeds in stealing the from undercover agents , but stumbles across his past self , who mistakes him for a disguised . After defeating past - , meets back up with and , who now must figure out another way to get the without running out of the limited supply of that allow them to travel through the quantum realm . returns to the present with the while and devise a plan to steal the from a installation in the 1970s , while also stealing further vials of in order to make the journey back home . While there , sights and has an meaningful conversation with his father . Rocket and travel to to retrieve the before uses it against the . While in , is reminded that his mother , , would die soon and has a chance encounter with her while steals the , the vaporized version of the , from . The two return to after counsels and he retrieves his hammer , elated to discover that he is still worthy of it . and travel to to steal the before does . As returns to the present with the , malfunctions and remains on . With two consciousnesses operating on 's systems , and discover the presence of future and go to kidnap her . realizes what has happened and tries to warn the others , but is too late . scans her memories and discovers the ' plan , and sends the more loyal past back to the present as a spy . and travel to to retrieve the , though are conflicted when , keeper of the stone , informs them that it can only be retrieved by sacrificing someone they love . The two fight over which will make the sacrifice , with ultimately taking the fall , while a distraught returns to with the . After everyone has returned to the present on , , , and set out to craft a gauntlet to wield the stones , one constructed from the same nanotech of 's latest suit . Banner volunteers himself to wield the gauntlet and bring back everyone that disappeared in ' snap , reasoning that he can withstand both the gamma radiation and the immense pain and injury brought on by using the stones . He succeeds , though they are almost immediately attacked by , who has been brought to by the impostor , destroying the quantum portal in the process . reduces the headquarters to rubble , splitting the team up and causing the gauntlet to fall into 's protection . The past is killed by her future self as she attempts to take the from , while , , and confront , who decides he will instead use the to destroy the universe and create one in his vision . The three fight one on one , with confirming 's theory that he is worthy of wielding , but are each bested by . Soon after ' army lands on , appears before , along with all of the and other allies revived by , before launching an assault on and his army . After a lengthy battle during which is reunited with and is reunited with past , wrestles with numerous for the . When he 's bound by 's energy , orders to have his ship fire multiple energy blasts , nearly devastating the ' efforts . reappears , taking out ' ship while fighting for control of the gauntlet . Using the from the new gauntlet , maneuvers the from ' hand to his own and uses them to turn and his entire army into , triumphantly stating " I am . " and console as he dies from exposure to the ' radiation . Following the battle , The hold a funeral for , whose I arc reactor is floated out on the lake next to his house . and take solace in the fact that and , who did not return in the snap , would be proud of their victory over . makes the of and joins the of the in order to find his true purpose , free of the burden of royalty and leadership for the first time in his life . returns home to his family and returns to school , where he is reunited with his best friend . Meanwhile , is tasked to go into the past to return the stones and 's hammer to their original time - lines , but decides not to return to the present and to instead live the rest of his life in the past with . He reappears before and as an old man , and passes his shield and the mantle of on to . A brief flashback shows and in an ordinary - looking house , finally sharing the dance they never got to have in their living room , truly happy at > 

 < synopsis > The tale of is a fantasy adventure : an epic struggle between humanity and nature . The story 's competing interests-- comprised of cursed monsters , an assortment of people driven by ambition , a selfless hero , and vengeful gods -- are remarkable in that there is no villain , instead portraying darkness and hate as it manifests in everyone . ( Note : This synopsis describes the English version of the and the film opens on a view of a mountainous forest shrouded in mist . A voiceover explains ancient gods and giant beasts inhabit the forests , owing their allegiance to the . The ancient gods once lived harmoniously with humans , but times have changed . The forest is disappearing and now is the age of gods and demons . Ashitaka ( : , : ) is a prince of the dwindling people living in the eastern forest . He rides his red , , up the hillside from his village passing three girls along the way , including ( : ) , his younger sister ( or , in the Japanese version , the girl has promised to marry ) . He tells the girls that the village oracle , - ( Japanese : ) , has sensed trouble and is ordering everyone back to the village . tells him the old man - noticed something from his watchtower , so rides to see him . Ashitaka climbs the tower and watches as a creature covered in wormy tendrils violently emerges from the forest . In the sun , it 's revealed to be a massive boar that has turned into a demon : a gami . It knocks down the tower but and - to safety before pursues it on . He pleads with the demon to spare their village , but the boar does n't listen . When it attacks the three village girls , is forced to intervene , killing it with two of his arrows . During the fight , the demon 's tendrils latch onto 's right arm and , with the killing blow , dissolve , burning his skin . Villagers rush up the hill , one of them carrying the elderly oracle . She gives some water to pour over his arm before bowing before the boar , promising to perform rites and asking it to bear them no ill will . The demon bitterly responds , saying they will know its hate and grief . It dies , decomposing into a skeleton . That evening - calls the village elders together in her hut and performs a divination using fortune stones to interpret the day 's events . She tells to show his scarred arm to the others and asks if he 's ready to hear his fate . When states his resolve , she reveals the scar will spread and eventually kill him . However , instead of waiting to die , he can rise to meet his fate . She gives him an iron ball recovered from the boar 's body , believing it to be the cause of his demonic transformation . The oracle tells to ride to the west to see with eyes unclouded but warns him he can never return . agrees , cutting his topknot as a symbol of his separation , and leaves . As he rides out of the village , approaches him , breaking the taboo of seeing a banished person . She gives him her crystal necklace . Ashitaka thanks her and says he will never forget her . He rides off , staring after him . The of the and travel many miles westward , across plains and mountains . One day , they see smoke in the distance and discover samurai soldiers fighting with unarmed villagers . rushes to the defense of a woman but , as he pulls back on his bow , his arm throbs visibly and when the arrow is released it flies with such force that it takes the samurai 's sword and lodges it in a tree , with the man 's arms still attached . Two samurai on horseback threaten to intercept . He yells at them to let him pass , but when they refuse , he releases another arrow , decapitating one . The other watches flee , convinced he 's a demon . As he cools his right arm under a small waterfall , notices the mark is growing . In a town , attempts to buy rice with a gold nugget . The seller refuses it at first , saying it is n't money , but a monk named ( : , : ) remarks that the nugget is pure gold and worth several bags of rice . Ashitaka quickly leaves the growing crowd with his single bag . follows as he leaves town , commenting that he noticed 's fighting skills against the samurai earlier . They see some thugs following them , no doubt after 's gold , and proposes a quick getaway . They camp together later , cooking their rice , and mentions an ancient people called the who made bowls and arrows like 's and who were rumored to ride red elk like 's , though he hints he 'll keep the prince 's secret . tells about his experience with the boar demon and his quest to discover its origins and shows the iron ball . does n't think much of 's curse ( " You 're under a curse ? So what ? So 's the whole damn world " ) , but he does tell him of a mining town further to the west , surrounded by ancient forests where giant gods still dwell . The next morning leaves quietly to continue his journey alone while sleeps . Gods and SpiritsOn a rain - slicked mountainside , a caravan of oxen and men carrying rice moves along a narrow path . Their leader , ( : , : ) , keeps watch with her first lieutenant , ( : , : ) . Suddenly she notices two giant , white wolves charging down the muddy slope . A masked girl rides one of them , holding her spear high . orders her men to open fire with their ishibiya , or hand cannons . The shots drive off the wolves and remarks that they were n't so big . responds that they were just pups ; " wait till you see their mother . "As if on cue , ( : , : ) attacks the caravan , sending people and oxen tumbling down the mountain . is more than twice the size of her pups and has two tails . The guards use a flame - thrower to set her on fire and shoots her in the chest , sending her off the cliff . The surviving men are pleased with themselves , but reminds them that it takes more than that to kill a god . She urges the survivors onward and tells them to forget about those who fell . Meanwhile , at the base of the mountain , arrives at a river swollen from the rainfall . He sees bodies floating by and pulls out two injured men , casualties from 's rice caravan . notices the massive body of on the other side of the river , along with her pups . He watches as the warrior girl , ( : , : ) , tends to , trying to suck the bullet from her wound and spitting out blood . 's growling alerts to 's presence . He introduces himself and asks if they are ancient gods . tells him to go away before disappearing into the forest with the wolves . A scream brings back to where he left the injured men . One of them , the ox - driver ( : , : ) , has woken up and is trying to get away from a small white spirit with a bobbing head , despite his broken leg and arm . Ashitaka calms him and tells him that it 's a kodama , a tree spirit , and it -- and the others that begin to appear -- are a sign that the forest is healthy . However , is worried the creature will bring its master , a large forest spirit . politely asks the kodama for safe passage through the forest and carries the unconscious man , a gunner , while rides . The kodama lead them to a beautiful and mysterious part of the wood where mossy trees grow among pools of clear water . sees the footprints of and the wolves . He sets the gunner down to fetch some water and notices the tracks of a three - toed animal he does n't recognize . He scans the area and spots a herd of deer followed closely by one with many antlers . It stops and 's arm suddenly throbs and moves on its own . He struggles to subdue it but only regains control when the mysterious deer vanishes . After the incident , notices the gunner he 's carrying seems a bit lighter . emerge from the forest where they see the iron town , a large settlement across a lake . The town is protected by a tall wooden stockade . They are welcomed by a crowd and explains how rescued them . approaches and demands to know who is and how he managed to walk through the forbidden forest with two injured men . He is cut short when 's wife , ( : , : ) , runs down and berates for getting injured and risking his livelihood . She takes a moment to thank before criticizing for not taking better care of his men . appears above and apologizes to and before inviting to see her later so she can thank him . eats with the men of . Some of the women stop by and invite him to see where they work . They heckle the men before leaving , giggling to themselves . The women are former prostitutes , the men explain ; buys the contracts of every brothel girl she finds . However , since fearless came to , things have changed for the better . They tell of , the boar who once ruled the forest surrounding the town . became enraged when the men cut trees down to get at the ore beneath the ground and often attacked with his herd of boars . When came with her gunners , she set fire to the forest and shot . 's arm swells in anger as he realizes that it was who inflicted his cursed wound , and who turned into a demon . finds inspecting samples of iron set to go out with the next shipment , at her side . He removes his sleeve and shows his arm , confronting her about her role in his curse . does n't deny her responsibility but asks 's intentions . When he responds " to see with eyes unclouded by hate , " laughs and agrees to show her secrets . She leaves in charge and takes to her private garden where she 's enlisted a group of lepers to serve as gunsmiths for her . They conjure new guns inspired by the inside their own hut . explains the guns are for the women in the fort , for their protection . She apologizes to again for inflicting his curse , but is angered by 's production of weapons and asks how much more hate she 'll spread . His arm attempts to draw his sword but holds it down , saying that he would n't hesitate to kill her to lift the curse , but he fears it would n't stop there . An elderly leper asks to have mercy on because she took pity on the lepers , caring for them and sheltering them when no one else would . He says life is hard , it is cursed , but still people find ways to keep living . Up on the stockade tests her new gun , firing onto the hillside and scattering a tribe of apes attempting to plant new trees . asks to live in ; once she kills the all the other gods will be reduced to lumbering beasts and ( which means vengeful spirit -- she 's referring to the wolf girl ) will be human . explains lives to kill her . It 's said the blood of the can grant immortality and theorizes that it can cure her lepers -- and maybe 's curse . Ashitaka leaves and visits the forge where he tries out the bellows . The women are eager to show him and assures him that , despite the hard work , their lives are better here than in the brothels . and her two wolf brothers approach . They rush down the hill and is vaulted over the stockade and into the fort . She races over rooftops , making her way to the top of the forge . Having sensed her presence , runs to meet her while leads two women into the center square , each carrying the new guns . As prepares her trap , begs not to throw her life away but , at the sound of a wolf 's howl , she rushes forward . A gun blast at her feet sends her plummeting off the roof and a second shot from 's women breaks the mask off her face , knocking her unconscious . Ashitaka uses the incredible strength of his cursed arm to rip a beam from the roof and halt the crowd before they can get to . He shakes her awake but she attacks him and runs to . and , surrounded by the cheering mob . His anger growing , walks forward , his hate manifesting as ghostly tendrils from his arm . He easily bends the sword of , who is now convinced is in league with . pushes his way through the crowd before grabbing 's arm and stopping 's onslaught with his sword hand . As the tendrils on his arm grow , he calls to the onlookers : " This is what hate looks like . It 's eating me alive , and soon it will kill me . Fear and anger only make it grow faster . "But grows tired of his curse , quipping that she 'll cure him by removing his arm , and swings at him with a small dagger . knocks both her and San out to stop them from fighting . He hands to her people and says he 's taking away . One of the women , upset at his treatment of , aims her gun and orders him not to move . Ashitaka calmly walks away but the gun goes off , passing through his body . However , 's curse keeps him alive and he keeps walking towards the gate . When the guards wo n't open the gate , saying it takes ten men to lift it , opens it himself despite bleeding profusely . 's wolf brothers wait just outside . tells them he 's bringing out to them , and he leaves with and with a final thanks to the townsfolk . Yakul carries and the unconscious on the mountainside . Soon , however , the loss of blood causes to fall from and awakes in time to see him fall . One of 's brothers attacks but calls him off before confronting about stopping her from killing . She holds his sword to his throat but he tells her to live and that she 's beautiful . This shocks but she is then interrupted by the clan who want to eat in order to become strong enough to regrow the forest . 's brothers chase the apes away when they insult since she is human . She then convinces her brothers to leave with her . calls , whose trust she gains , to her to help carry into the forest . In the of the Yakul 's help , takes the unconscious to the heart of the 's domain , where they cross the lake to an island . The island is the forest 's holy of holies , and will not set foot on it ; a wise move as noted by . She leaves Ashitaka lying half in the water with his head pillowed on the soft moss of the island and sticks a sapling she cut into the ground by his head . She removes 's harness , telling him he 's free , before swimming away . The little kodamas watch the humans before turning their attention to the horizon as a huge figure comes into view : the , the 's two - legged nighttime form . They greet it with the clattering noise made by their rotating heads . The lowers itself into the clearing where lies . On a mountainside some way off , watches the from a hideaway , dressed in a bear skin . He points it out to his fellow hunters and explains that is the reason they 're out there , despite their superstitious fears . shows them the notice from the giving them permission to hunt the . They watch as the resumes its deer - like form . On the island , the walks over to look upon . It accepts the sapling as an offering and breathes on it , causing it to wither and die . As and his hunters climb down the mountain , they see hundreds of boars coming up an adjacent one . The hunters recognize the herd as one not native to the area before they see the leader : the giant , , ( : , : ) . and the hunters run when lets out a roar , realizing he is aware of them . Ashitaka wakes from a dream - like vision where he is under water as the touches his wound , stopping the bleeding . He touches his side to find the bullet wound is gone , though 's curse remains on his arm and has even spread to his hand . San returns to him and tells him that she knows all about him and his village , thanks to , and agrees to help him since the spared his life . She offers meat jerky , but he 's too weak to chew it . San chews for him and passes the food from her mouth to his . The act brings tears to 's eyes . arrives with 's brothers , then 's herd of boars . They say they 've come to kill humans and save the forest and demand to know why there are humans in the 's woods . is spared their ridicule as 's daughter and she explains the healed . The boars are furious ; why would the spare a human but not , their previous leader ? says the 's reasons are his own . As herself has been wounded by the humans , she will likely die in the forest at the behest of the . confesses it was he who killed and shows his cursed hand . then comes forward and , despite being blind , inspects 's hand , sniffing at it . He believes his story , saddened that a demon came from their tribe . He then tells how he plans to attack the humans and , though they likely will not win , will keep fighting to the last and leave the humans in . After the boars leave , and see the walking on the water of the lake . A battle rages near ; and her men are fighting and his samurai , who wish to control the ore - rich lands . However , 's men are decimated by 's gunfire . As returns to , she meets , who accompanies her into the fort . tells that has offered to back off if she gives him half her iron but , as a messenger arrives at the gates , she shuts the door and leaves her women to taunt the horseman . want some of our iron ? Here you go ! " They shoot at the messenger , who flees . Jigo laughs at the women 's bravado before introducing the note sent from the ( the emperor ) himself requesting the head of the for a large sum . The emperor believes that the head will give him immortal life and is keen to collect the reward with 's help . If she refuses he alludes to the fact that his small army of could be put to better use alongside 's forces . shows the 's letter to her women who have no idea who the emperor is , demonstrating that out here the has no true power ; it lies in the strength of her people . She tells she will help him hunt the and tells him that it will be done her way , with no loss of human life , and requests that he remove his riflemen from their hiding place in the hills . Jigo laughs at her cunning . Before she goes , he asks whether a young man riding an elk came to . , and went , " replies . 's riflemen take up residence in the fort and are regarded with suspicion due to their solemn nature . meets with her women and explains that they must remain in the fort and defend against , since she does n't trust the men . assures them he 'll protect but the women scorn him , saying , " That 's what we 're afraid of . 's wakes in 's cave , high above the trees , and finds sleeping beside him . He gets up , his arm throbbing , and walks out onto the rock ledge to look down on the forest . , perched on the rocks above him , suggests that he jump to end his pain . asks what 's been happening and tells him that he 's been asleep for days . She 's sorry he did n't cry out in his sleep because then she would have felt justified in biting his head off to keep him quiet . The boars are on the move , says , and she can feel the pain of the forest as it dies beneath their rampaging feet . asks why the humans and the forest ca n't live together in peace but laughs , saying such a thing ca n't happen . She longs for the day when she can kill . There will be a battle , she predicts , and will fight alongside the gods and die with them . When objects , saying that she 's human , becomes angry and reveals that she once attacked some humans who invaded the forest . In their terror , the people threw their baby at . The baby was ; kept her and raised her . Though she loves , understands that will never fully belong anywhere -- either to the wolves or the humans -- and there 's nothing or can do about that . tells to leave her cave by dawn ; if he comes back she 'll kill him . When wakes up again in the cave it 's broad daylight and and are gone . gathers his things , finding supplies neatly left for him . Still very weak , he stumbles down to . One of the wolf brothers escorts him out of the forest and on to a path to . throws 's crystal necklace to the wolf , asking him to give it to . A rides her brother to meet on a mountainside overlooking a barren hillside where 's men have cut down trees and built fires stinking with sulfur to blunt the animals ' sense of smell in anticipation of battle with the forest gods . recognizes the trap ; the boars will run straight to the humans , blinded and enraged by the felled trees . is too stubborn to change his tactics and will run head - on . says she 's going to help ; she feels that with neither eyes nor sense of smell to depend on , needs her more than does . tells that she can go away with if she wants--"that boy wanted to share his life with you . " replies bitterly that she hates humans . But when her second brother arrives and gives her 's necklace , she seems touched at the gift . puts it around her neck as she says goodbye to , who will go and wait for the . and the young wolves go off together to join the boars , who are running headlong into battle . Ashitaka rides towards , dejected , before he hears the explosions set off by the rampaging boars . However , closer gunfire draws his attention and he discovers that is under siege . As he nears the town , some samurai try to stop him . Yakul leaps over them , jumps into the lake , and swims for as deflects the samurais ' arrows with his sword . They find that 's men have breached the outer wall of and the women are holed up in the center , still defending the fort . They ask to carry word of their plight to and bring her back . Kouroku returns 's bow and arrows . Ashitaka rides off , pursued by samurai on horseback . As he crosses the mountains he comes to one smoking from the remains of the boar battle . A samurai shoots an arrow into 's haunch . His anger increasing and his curse spreading , stops to fight . His arrows take the arm off one samurai and decapitate another before the remaining samurai rides off . pulls the arrow out of 's hindquarters and tries to leave him behind , saying he 'll come back for him later , but Yakul limps along behind him . They reach the part of the battlefield where 's men and a few of 's mercenaries are burying their dead . sees men covered in cloth awaiting burial and dead boars piled everywhere . He is told by an iron worker that they were used as bait ; boars came at them , igniting mines buried underground while grenades were dropped by mercenaries from above . Ashitaka learns that was in the battle but she is not among the dead . He then tells the men that is being attacked and he needs to deliver a message to . Two mercenaries demand the men get back to work digging but the iron workers argue , saying they must return to and that a tracker must be sent for . then finds one of 's wolf brothers pinned under a boar and attempts to free him . Seeing this as treason , the mercenaries try to subdue with poisoned darts but the iron workers revolt against them and help free the wolf . leaves Yakul in the care of the iron workers and runs off with the wolf towards the forest . An the forest , a hunter reports to and that is badly wounded and heading for the domain of the ; is with him . walks with and her other brother . is bleeding heavily and losing strength . He stops as a clan of ape gods appear in the trees overhead , throwing sticks and claiming that 's actions have brought terrible things into the forest : " Bad things coming -- neither human or animal . " is unable to smell anything over the blood and can only watch as small animals run from the oncoming threat . A boar appears behind them , followed by many others , but they slither across the ground unnaturally . realizes they 're humans wearing boar skins . believes them to be his warriors returned from the dead . Renewed but delirious , he walks on towards the domain of the . fears that will become a demon ; like before him , he 's defeated , mortally wounded , and filled with fear and hate . She sends her brother to tell what 's happening but stays with herself , hoping to avert his change , but there 's nothing she can do . begs him to stop , but ignores her and soon his anger and fear begin to bubble out of him in bloody tendrils as he transforms into a demon . As she fends off the ' ghost boars ' , hears one of her wolf brothers howling a message : is looking for her . An answering howl from the other brother tells that is in danger , more true than they know -- is knocked out by a hunter 's slingshot and sucked into the tendrils covering . - resumes his rush toward the heart of the forest . Ashitaka mounts the wolf to move faster and soon comes upon . He dismounts to tell to halt her death march and return to help before running ahead , but , intent on finding and killing the , says the women must take care of themselves and keeps moving . is confused as to whose side is on . Behind 's back , some of 's men wonder if they can do without her , but says killing gods is dangerous business -- he 's happy to let her do it . Ashitaka reaches the 's pool , where he finds dying at the water 's edge . - arrives , still followed by the hunters in boar skins . calls to and he can see her struggling on 's snout , growing demon - tendrils herself . Ashitaka leaps onto 's snout and tries to dig out while the wolf brothers fight off the hunters , but is thrown off by the demon before he can get to . He bounces off of and lands in the water , stunned . , who was saving the last of her strength to fight , rouses herself to confront the demon and drags out of the mass of tendrils . As frees , the approaches in its deer form , walking across the water . and can see it from their hiding place . Quelled by its appearance , backs away and the tendrils begin to melt . Ashitaka wakes in the water to the sound of 's voice asking him to save . He comes to the surface and sees shoot the , though he cries out to her to stop . The stops and sinks a bit when it 's hit , but recovers and keeps walking . takes from and returns to the water to wash the demon tendrils from her . Meanwhile , the takes the lives of and , to the surprise of the humans . comments that life and death are his to give and take . The begins to make its change into the and turns to the hunters . "Watch closely , everyone . I 'm going to show you how to kill a god , " says . " The trick is not to fear him . "Seeing her take aim , throws his sword and hits her ishibiya , which only distracts her for a moment . The looks at and plants sprout from the wooden parts of her gun , but this does n't stop her either . She fires and hits the half - transformed in the neck , separating its head which falls to the ground . Horrible black goo spouts from the neck , killing whatever it falls on . Dead kodamas fall from the trees all around . grabs the severed head and gives it to . Porters come up carrying a round metal box . puts the head in the box and they run off . 's head , apparently detached from her body by the black ooze , wriggles forward and bites off 's arm before bouncing away into the ooze . While and her brothers take refuge on the 's holy island , takes and swims to the island with her while wades after him , having never learned to swim . rips the crystal necklace from around her neck and orders to let her kill , but he assures that 's revenge has been taken and tells he promised the women he 'd return her to them . Angry at , stabs him with the dagger but he hugs her close , saying that despite everything they 're still alive and can still save the forest , if she 'll help him . Meanwhile the prowls the forest in search of its head , spreading black ooze and destruction with every step . It grows reaching arms from its neck and sends them down into the forest , chasing after and the three porters . In , it 's quiet . The women are guarding the walls and keeping an eye on 's camp while one of the leper fixes 's ishibiya . Looking up at the mountain , they see the headless and its tide of black , killing ooze coming over the ridge toward the town . It destroys 's encampments and keeps coming . Ashitaka , , and her brothers arrive and tells the women and the lepers to get in the lake to escape the ooze . Urged on by , most of the people manage to get away before the ooze overruns the town . Standing in the water , they watch as the forge catches fire and burns . , , and the wolves go after and the head . When they catch , demands that the head be returned to the . Jigo pleads to keep it , noting the sun is about to rise , before he attacks and tells the other porters to run . San chases them but they are stopped by the . In their fear , they drop the metal box and it rolls down the hill . stops it , tumbling down the hill a ways and coming to rest on a large rock . , , and one porter catch up to him as a tide of ooze surrounds them . Ashitaka convinces him there 's nothing else to be done and says " human hands must return it . " opens the box and and hold the head up , begging the to take it and be at peace . The leans forward and takes its head back , showering them all in a bright light . On the lake , the refugees watch the straighten up with its head back in place and resume its usual appearance of starry transparency . Rafts approach carrying , , and the rest of the iron town men ; the two groups are happily reunited . Without having returned to its glade before sunrise , the collapses at the dawn , falling on and blowing much of it away in a strong wind . The burning remains of the town and 's camp fly away into the barren hills which slowly turn green with new growth and sprouting plants . looks on in amazement and the lepers look down at themselves to find they 've been healed . Yakul , who arrived on the rafts with the men , finds and asleep in the grass beside her brothers . Yakul wakes them and they find that the has disappeared . is distraught at the 's death but assures her it can not die , since it is life itself . He looks at his hand which is scarred , but curse free . tells that she likes him but can not forgive humans for what they 've done . He understands and tells her that he will live at and help them rebuild so that they can live alongside the forest and will visit her often . nods and departs with her brothers . , recovering from the loss of her arm , is humbly optimistic . Sitting with her women and , she promises to start anew and build a better town . She sends for to thank him . , perched on the rocks high above with his one remaining porter , laughs to himself , saying , " Well , I give up . You ca n't win against fools . "Around the dead trees near the 's pool , new trees are growing . Among them walks a little white kodama , rattling its head.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The film is divided into three distinct time periods : 1920 , 1932 - 3 , and 1968 . The story frequently jumps back and forth between these times , and is summarized chronologically here . Scenes presented in square brackets [ like this ] appear only in the 2012 's . In 1968 , " " ( ) , returns to the of , , following a prolonged absence . He has been called back under mysterious circumstances : he 's received a notice from a local rabbi telling him that the cemetery in his old neighborhood is being closed and the remains of those buried there are being moved . He sets himself up in with a room in a bar owned by an old friend , " " ( ) , and begins to investigate the summons he received . Having lived for years under the assumed name of " " , is suspicious of the letter , thinking that he 's been called back to see to the reburial of his old friends , " " ( ) , " " ( ) , and ( ) , who he used to be in a gang with . Noodles believes someone is seeking revenge against him . In 1920 , the boys grow up in poverty in a Jewish neighborhood on the . They ostensibly work for a young local Irish gangster named ( ) ; however , ( now played by ) and his friends ( ) , ( ) and ( ) , have ambitions to strike out on their own . One day , while attempting to " roll " a drunkard ( ) , they are foiled in their plot by ( ) , who has just moved into the neighborhood with his mother ( ) . He keeps the drunk 's pocket watch and leaves the boys to be harassed by a local policeman , ( whom the boys call " " ) ( ) , who constantly bullies them . Noodles finds later and demands the watch back . happens by and takes the watch for himself . and come to admire each others ' resolve and decide to be friends . Though and share leadership of the gang , it is who is the more charismatic and makes most of the decisions for them . One day spies walking along the rooftops of the neighborhood and follows him . immediately realizes that is going to see their pre - teen ( albeit physically matured ) friend , ( ) , who prostitutes herself . The boys catch in the act and photograph him ; quickly disappears with the film plate . acquiesces to their demands that , as the new gang in the area , he pay them as much in tribute as he does and that he do some enforcement work for them . They also get their watch back from him and make him pay for and to have sex with . Noodles has long desired to become romantically involved with 's ( ) sister , ( ) ; their father , ( ) , owns the local kosher restaurant . While using the men 's room in the restaurant , often spies on her through a small hole in the wall while she practices her ballet steps and undresses afterward . , however , mostly ignores his advances , with the exception of an intimate moment they share when the restaurant is closed during . The boys become something of a success in their neighborhood , thieving houses and stores and rolling more drunks and other weaker types for small earnings that are substantial for themselves . When hears that there 's another gang that is n't under his control , he and his thugs horribly beat and just outside 's father 's restaurant . When pleads with to let him inside after the vicious beating , refuses . Undaunted , the boys meet with a local Italian mobster , ( ) , and show him an invention of ' that will allow to keep all the imported cargo he illegally deals even after his ships crews are forced to throw it overboard by agents . The first time the boys use ' invention , it works perfectly and the boys are overjoyed at the cargo that floats to the surface . falls overboard and does n't surface for a seemingly long amount of time . Worried that his friend has drowned , looks for him and is perturbed when finally appears . The invention is a success and the boys become very wealthy , receiving 10 % of 's earnings . They rent a train station locker and stash their cash earnings in a leather briefcase , promising that they will only withdraw or deposit funds from the locker when they are all present , and that the key will be kept by . On their way back from the station , they are attacked by , who this time carries a pistol . is the only member of the gang who is shot by ( being the smallest , he is unable to run for cover as fast as his companions ) and dies in ' arms . Noodles retaliates and stabs with a switchblade several times before two mounted policemen tries to stop him . Noodles , still in a fit of rage , stabs one of the policemen before he is arrested and sentenced to 12 years imprisonment . His friends turn out to see him delivered to the juvenile reformatory . In 1932 , is released from prison , where he is picked up by . explains that he and the rest of the gang have set themselves up in an undertaking business . However , the mortician 's parlor is a front for their real business : bootlegging liquor , which has made them rich . According to , they run the most popular speakeasy in the city ; they hide the scotch they serve in the building 's steam heating system . A party is held for Noodles on his return and introduces him to some new associates , ( ) and his partner ( ) . and want the gang to rob a diamond broker 's they own in . During the heist , is goaded by the broker 's masochist secretary , ( ) , into assaulting and " ravishing " her ; Noodles does so despite a stern warning from not to abuse her . The gang meets with to give him the diamonds and kill him and his men on 's orders . Noodles , unaware of the deal that made with to murder , is quite angry with ; his reasoning is that their gang should not be liable to anyone like and should operate independently . Also , is concerned that one day may want or to eliminate the other . assures it will never happen . As they drive away from the scene , Noodles foolhardily drives their car off a long pier into the bay . [ Everyone except escapes the car and surfaces . After a few minutes , the guys worry that may have been killed by a nearby dredging machine , but he appears soon after - a mirroring of tricking him when they were teenagers.]Some time later , in 1933 , the gang then begins to aid a local union leader , " " ( ) , who has made a career of standing up to corrupt labor leaders , particularly a man named Crowning ( ) . After rescuing from 's thug , ( ) , who is about to burn him alive , the gang offers their assistance to , who initially refuses their help , not wanting to deal with men who operate in bootlegging , drugs or prostitution . Next , the gang turns their attention to a local labor strike being engineered by a celebrity police captain , ( ) . is being manipulated by the factory owners into allowing his officers to protect the scab workers the owners have allowed into their factory . The gang concocts a brilliant and diabolical scheme to switch 's newborn son ( his family 's only boy after four girls ) at the hospital : calls him just after he discovers the switch ( the gang switched his boy for a girl in the nursery ) and tells him to call off his officers and let the workers and management work out the strike . However , when tries to remember which baby they switched 's boy for , he ca n't ; he 's lost the switch list with the child 's number on it . The mix - up does n't faze the gang , however , and they agree to simply give the number of a random boy from the ward , coldly laughing over the fates of some of the children they 'd mixed up . During the time that the gang is expanding their business dealings , rekindles his romance with ( now played by ) . He arranges for a lavish vacation for them both at a posh resort in the that is closed for the season . Revealing that his desire to be reunited with her was what drove him to see through his prison term , admits his love for ; however , she is still reluctant to get romantically involved with him , and reveals that she intends to leave for to pursue her acting career . On their return trip in their limousine , rapes . , he orders the driver ( producer ) to take her home . [ While drowning his sorrows in drink , meets a young prostitute named ( ) , who returns his affections and soon becomes his girlfriend ; in his stupor , he spends their first night together calling her " " . ] Some time later that day , boards a train to ; , from a distance in the station , watches her leave ; she closes the compartment blind when she sees him . While calling and for assistance , is nearly killed on the street by in a drive - by shooting . The gang retaliates , shooting at Crowning outside his club , killing his bodyguards , including . With a wounded leg , is crippled for life but is able to continue his career . While they celebrate with in the hospital , 's attorney , ( ) , tells the gang that may soon end and they should think about entering legitimate business with their large fleet of bootlegging trucks , with acting as their front . seems to like the idea , however , is unconvinced , still adhering to his old mantra of not working for anyone but themselves . suggests that ' idea of business is too archaic and that they need to expand to make more money , but Noodles still adheres steadfastly to his street code . A few months later , Prohibition approaches its end , and the gang find themselves out of work . and take a vacation to with their respective girlfriends . Not wanting to go into legitimate work , reveals an audacious plan to rob the in . thinks the plan is too outrageous , knowing that it almost certainly would get him and the rest of the gang killed . - who by this time has joined the brothel that ( ) runs in conjunction with the gang 's speakeasy , and has become 's girlfriend - tries to convince Noodles to get to abandon his plan , or tip the police to get arrested to give him time to think over the scheme 's absurdity . Noodles plans to alert the police about a liquor exchange has planned with and , which is set to take place a short time after the gang 's party in celebration of the end of Prohibition . Noodles does so and , when joins him in the office , provokes into a fight by suggesting his friend is crazy ; it is a vulnerable fact of 's life that his father was mentally unbalanced and died in a sanatorium . Noodles shows up at the site of the liquor buy during a cold and rainy night and sees that and have been killed , while appears to have been horribly burned beyond recognition . After returning to 's bar and finding murdered and savagely beaten ( depicted in the first scenes of the film ) , he retrieves the key to the locker at the train station . At the station , he finds that the money has been replaced with newspapers . Puzzled , buys a one - way bus ticket to and leaves . During his sleuthing in 1968 , finds out that his friends were moved to a different cemetery and an elaborate mausoleum was constructed for them . When the bronze doors to the mausoleum are opened , an automated recording plays the same flute tune that played when he was alive . He finds the key to the train station locker on a plaque inside that states himself put the plaque and key there to honor his friends . [ He then has a chance encounter with the cemetery 's directress ( ) ; referring to himself by his " " identity , asks about " " 's level of involvement in the mausoleum 's construction , and whether she had any contact with him . She reveals that aside from his suggestion of the inscription above the bronze doors - " Your youngest and strongest will fall by the sword " - and providing a tape recording of 's song , he gave the architects free reign with regard to its building , and that the deal was finalized through his overseas bank account . During their conversation , notices that he 's being tailed by the unseen driver of a , which speeds away as he tries to approach it , although he manages to write down its license plate number . ] He goes to the locker and finds the same leather case and more money inside . A note inside the case reads " Advance payment for your next job".[Noodles traces the to the mansion of , the of ; the car suddenly explodes as he watches it leave via the front gate . ] According to news reports , is under investigation for corruption ; several witnesses set to testify against , including the passenger of the destroyed ( a ) , have all died under mysterious circumstances . Noodles suspects a connection between and the money left to him . Before visiting 's house under invitation to a party , he talks to who tells him that is once again living in the area and is now a famous actress . [ After seeing 's performance of " and " ] , visits her backstage ; the two have a lengthy conversation , during which notes that the role of is perfect for her , since , unlike everyone else he knows from his past life , " ( has ) not ) her " . 's most important revelation is that she and are together , and have a grown - up son , also named , who bears a striking resemblance to when he was younger . is , in fact , , and that night hosts the party , which is attended by many of 's most influential people . [ There , he privately confronted by , whose tenure as a union leader has become a front for criminal activities that are secretly supported by . However , their working relationship has turned sour , as has enough evidence with which to testify and his colleagues ' guilt before the corruption committee . He is responsible for the assassination of the - an attempt on 's life - and coerces him into signing documents transferring some of 's power to him in exchange for 's financial stability and safety . As leaves , he suggests that should avoid assassination altogether by committing suicide , which somewhat agrees with.]Noodles arrives at the party , and is brought before , who reveals that - with the help of and corrupt members of the police - he faked his own death during the liquor exchange where he was " killed " and has , for the past 30 years , created the persona as a disguise . With the threat of assassination looming over the upcoming investigation , tells that he is the only person that he will allow himself to be killed by ( hence the money and the cryptic note in the suitcase ) , given that he took from what mattered most to him - the gang 's money and . refuses the offer , and he continues to refuse to acknowledge that is alive , still referring to him as " " . Noodles explains to / that he feels betrayed and has felt guilty for the entire span was gone , which is punishment enough . He leaves through a secret passage ; on the street outside 's estate , he catches a glimpse of / standing by the road . A garbage truck [ which had noticed in his earlier scouting of the mansion ] drives by , the augers in the back clearly visible , suggesting ( but not concluding for certain ) that / threw himself into them to his death . As watches the red taillights of the garbage truck driving away , the lights magically turn white , and they become the headlights of a convoy of cars from the 1930s driving by the mansion playing the song " " , akin to celebrations from the end of Prohibition . Noodles then walks away into the night , alone . The film ends in 1933 , with visiting a Chinese opium den in the immediate wake of his friends ' death . Laying down after a few puffs from an opium pipe , he smiles as the closing credits has been suggested by some fans , critics and film historians that the 1968 sequences were all part of an opium - induced dream experienced by > 

 < synopsis > Though Will ( ) has genius - level intelligence ( such as a talent for memorizing facts and an intuitive ability to prove sophisticated mathematical theorems ) , he works as a janitor at and lives alone in a sparsely furnished apartment in an impoverished neighborhood . An abused foster child , he subconsciously blames himself for his unhappy upbringing and turns this self - loathing into a form of self - sabotage in both his professional and emotional lives . Hence , he is unable to maintain either a steady job or a steady romantic relationship . The first week of classes , Will solves a difficult graduate - level math problem that ( ) , a and combinatorialist , left on a chalkboard as a challenge to his students , hoping someone might solve it by the semester 's end . Everyone wonders who solved it , and puts another problem on the board -- one that took him and his colleagues two years to prove . Will is discovered in the act of solving it , and initially believes that Will is vandalizing the board and chases him away as Will insults him . When Will turns out to have solved it correctly , tries to track Will down . One night after work , and his best friend and a couple of their other friends go to a bar near . At the bar , spots a beautiful woman , ( ) and he hits on her , claiming to be a student himself . One of 's fellow co - , ( ) , tries to humiliate , challenging his knowledge of American colonial history . Will steps to 's defense , matching step - for - step with historical facts he 'd memorized . A potential fight is eventually defused and Will finds that is attracted to him , getting her phone number . A few days later Will attacks a youth who had bullied him years before in kindergarten , and he now faces imprisonment after hitting a police officer who was responding to the fight -- a tough judge refuses to be tricked by 's sharp knowledge of law precedent , which includes citing a case from the 1700s . Realizing Will might have the potential to be a great mathematician , such as the genius , intervenes on his behalf , offering him a choice : either Will can go to jail , or he can be released into 's personal supervision , where he must study mathematics and see a psychotherapist to help him with his anger and defensive personality . Will chooses the latter even though he seems to believe that he does not need therapy . Five psychologists fail to connect with . Out of sheer desperation , finally calls on ( ) , an estranged old friend and classmate of his . Sean differs from his five predecessors in that he is also from and pushes back at and is eventually able to get through to him and his hostile , sarcastic defense mechanisms . At one point , Will analyzes a watercolor painting that had done himself and concludes that it reflects 's suppressed feelings and guilt over the premature death of his wife . Sean becomes offended and hostile and grabs Will by the throat , threatening to sink his chances for reform , at which point Will ends the appointment and walks out ; walks in believing that Will has ruined his chances with yet another therapist . However , sees Will as a challenge and tells to bring him back each week . In a later session , Will is particularly struck when tells him how he gave up his ticket to see the in the 1975 ( missing " " 's famous home run in the infamous " Game 6 " ) in order to meet and spend time with a stranger in a bar , who would later become his wife . Will is spurred to try to establish a relationship with ( ) , a young woman he met at a bar near . This doctor - patient relationship , however , is far from one - sided . Will challenges in the same way that is encouraging Will to take a good , hard , objective look at himself and his life . 's own pathology is that he is unable and unwilling to even consider another romantic relationship in the aftermath of his beloved wife 's premature death from cancer several years before , possibly the primary reason why agrees to take on as a client . Meanwhile , pushes Will so hard to excel that Will eventually refuses to go to the job interviews that has arranged for him for positions that might prove challenging , even to his immense talents . and also squabble about 's future ; believes that is pushing Will to fast and also points out that 's friends are the most dedicated and loyal people he associates with . Will 's accidental witnessing of this furious quarrel somehow acts as a catalyst for his decision to enter a deeper level of trust and sharing with . He has apparently realized from this event that the situation is a little more complex than vs. The . He now sees that these mentors are every bit as human , fallible , and conflicted as he is . Skylar asks Will to move to with her , where she will begin medical school at . Will panics at the thought . then expresses support about his past , which is received as patronizing and triggers a tantrum in which Will storms out of the dorm while in a state of undress . He shrugs off the work he 's doing for as " a joke , " even though is incapable of solving some of the theorems and admittedly envies Will . begs Will not to throw it all away , but Will walks out on him anyway . At a later job interview , Will gives the interviewer a long explanation about why he does n't want to be a government code - breaker . At another interview , Will sends in his place . mocks the panel of representatives , even persuading them to give him all the cash they have before mildly threatening them with a call from his attorney . Sean points out that Will is so adept at anticipating future failure in his personal and romantic relationships , that he either allows them to fizzle out or deliberately bails in order to avoid the risk of future emotional pain . When Will then provides a whimsical reply to 's very serious query of what he wants to do with his life , simply shows him the door . When Will further tells his best friend ( ) that he wants to be a laborer for the rest of his life , becomes brutally honest with : He believes it 's an " insult " for Will to waste his potential as a laborer , and that his recurring wish is to knock on 's door in the morning when he picks him up for work and find that he just is n't there , that he has left without saying goodbye . 's honesty hits home with Will more than anyone else 's , even a trained professional like . Will goes to another therapy session , where Sean shares that he was also a victim of child abuse . At first , Will is defensive and resentful at 's repeated reassurances that it was not Will 's fault that he was so horribly abused and abandoned . Will eventually breaks down in tearful acknowledgment . Finally , after much self - reflection , Will decides to cease being a victim of his own inner demons and to take charge of his life . When his buddies present him with a rebuilt for his 21st birthday , he decides to go to and reunite with , setting aside his lucrative corporate and government job offers . Will leaves a brief note for explaining what he 's doing , using one of 's own quips , " I had to go see about a girl . " also leaves to travel the world , though not before reconciling with . The movie ends as poignantly discovers , in fulfillment of his own long - standing wish , that Will has left for a better life . Will is then shown starting his life - affirming drive to for a new beginning with and a leap into an unpredictable future.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The film opens to a wave of comets , shooting across the sky . Two teenagers , and begin to speak , almost simultaneously . They speak of time and of dreams , and how each can be a great loss . A piece of one comet breaks off and plummets to the see struggle in her sleep . She calls out to , asking him if he remembers . Mitsuha wakes up . But it is not her really . It is , who is freaked out to be in a girls body ( though not above copping a feel on 's breasts ) . younger sister comes into her room , noticing her being weird again and tells her breakfast is ready . , as , disrobes and looks in the mirror , freaked out by the strange dream he keeps having ; waking up as a girl . Going downstairs , apparently back to her normal self , eats with , , who is their grandmother and guardian . and note that had been acting weird the day before . They watch a broadcast that notes that a comet not seen for over a thousand years will be able to be seen in the sky in a months time . Mitsuha walks to school and meets up with her friends and . As they walk , they see a campaign speech by the local mayor , who is up for reelection . As she walks by , the man screams at to stand up straight . We realize that the mayor is actually father , estranged from the rest of the family for unknown reasons . At school , flips through a notebook , and finds a note . It reads , " Who Are You?"Later , learns that the day before she had forgotten her classroom and where her locker was . This information shocks and surprises her . chalks it up to stress is under to perform a ritual for the family shrine , something does n't want to be reminded of . As the three walk home , they bemoan how small their town of is ; there are no restaurants , bookstores , or social scene . Mitsuha herself dreams of graduating school so she can move to . suggests they go to a caf . The girls scream out excited . In actuality , it is just a vending machine nearby a park bench . goes home , leaving with . asks him about his future plans . Katsuhiko says he will most likely just stay in town like he always has after graduation . , , and practice the art of ( braid making ) . tells them the importance of what they are creating . The mayor meets with 's father , who is part of the local construction union , in order to get the support of his men for the upcoming election . Katsuhiko is told by his father that he will work with them the following weekend to his annoyance . The next night , and perform the ritual for their shrine with includes ritualized dancing and the creation of ; a sake in which someone chews rice into a paste and spits it back into a bowl , allowing it to ferment into alcohol . A few of classmates walk by the ritual and mock her , to her annoyance . As they walk home tells her big sister not to take it so personally , but is losing patience with her life . " I hate this town ! " she screams out . " I hate this life ! Please make me a handsome boy in my next life!"The next day , wakes up but not as herself . She is in 's body . She is quite disturbed to be a boy and all that entails physically . Finding out she has overslept , she quickly gets dressed and heads out , suddenly struck that she is finally walking around . ( as ) arrives to school hours late and is accosted by his friends and , who note that has been acting weird as well . They suggest going to a caf , and readily agrees as there are none where she lives . Getting a call on 's phone , she realizes has a job at a restaurant and she is going to be late . Mitsuha goes to work but being is harder than it looks . She is unprepared to work in a restaurant , making mistakes all night . It finally comes to a head , when a man tries to con the place for free food . is overwhelmed and when the man wants to pick a fight , 's older co - worker comes over and handles the situation , though the man cuts her skirt with a box cutter out of spite . Later , tells that she followed the handbook to handle the situation though she wished she could have done something more severe to the man who was clearly conning the restaurant . Noticing the cut in skirt , offers to fix it . is charmed by this , saying has been changing lately , and she is charmed that he now has a feminine side . The next day , is back to normal and knows nothing of the previous day . The staff he works with wants to know more details with his relationship with , but he has no idea what they are talking about . comes in and tells them all to have a good day , winking at , which makes him blush . By this point , and realize their body switching dreams are actually happening , and take steps to help out each other if they switch bodies . Writing notes to each other on their smart phones , and in notebooks , they each set ground rules so they do n't step on each others toes . Mitsuhas rules are more concerned with etiquette , not having him taking showers as her ( so see her naked ) and other social cues . gives her tips on his job and tells her not to blow all his hard earned money on sweets , which only makes him have to take more shifts at the restaurant . Despite trying to play nice , both ca nt help but have a little fun at the others expense . makes a few people fall in love with at school while flirts with , giving a real shot with her . Both of them are livid with the others meddling , both noting that , I do nt want a day , switches with on a weekend day . It turns out to be the day , , and are traveling to the family shrine far into the forest . While they walk , talks to them about the idea of a union ; whether it is a braid they created , time itself , or even taking a drink , unions are made every day . The three make it to the shrine and make an offering of the sake they made during the ritual . wakes up . Checking his phone , he notices a text from , saying she ca nt wait to meet him . Confused , he checks the notes in his phone , and realized that had set him up on a date with minutes from then . quickly gets dressed and races out of his house , racing to meet her . Meanwhile , gets ready for her day , using her braid to tie up her hair . She realizes and are most likely on their date at that moment . She looks into the mirror and sees that she is crying . She is surprised at first but then realizes the truth ; she wanted to have that date with herself . Try as she may , she is beginning to fall for a boy she has never met . meets up with and go to a nice , if expensive restaurant . Though they both share a mutual crush , is nervous and unsure how to act . His mind is somewhere else . At one point , they look at a photo display , and is taken by a group of shots that remind him of town . comes up to him and pointedly states she became more attracted to him once he starting acting odd , but he has changed again . He has become someone else . Later , tries to extend the date but declines . She notes that is clear that has a crush on someone else ; that is why he is acting so different . , making a decision , tries to call . Back in , cuts her hair . She goes to the local town festival with her friends . The comet finally becomes visible , and in a field , stares in . She sees a part of the comet break off and fall . Her eyes widenBack in , is sad when the call can not be connected . He wishes they could switch again , but after that night , it never happened again . Days pass , and goes through the motions . He begins to sketch from memory , trying desperately to figure out where she lives , with little luck . One day , he decides to leave the city to find the town and finally meet . Tagging along are and , who are there for moral support . They are curious and charmed by mystery girl , while must be coy about how he met her . The trio travel many places but no one knows the town has drawn . About to give up , and his friends stop at a local restaurant . The owner recognizes the place as , but when asks how far away it is , the owner goes silent for a moment before explaining three years before the town was destroyed by a comet fragment , killing over 500 people . is taken to the outskirts of where he sees little left of the town . He tries to show his friends the notes left for him on his phone , only for them to disappear . He does nt know what to think . The trio goes to a local library and sees the reports about the tragedy and the list of the dead . , her sister , and her friends are among the dead . is shocked and heartbroken ; he is somehow linked to a dead girl , who died three years ago . The three get a hotel room for the night . asks opinion on recent behavior and what he claims about . , while admitting it is all strange , notes she always found to be nice , but he became even a better person because of this girl . Later that night , and talk . She notices a braid on wrist . says he got a few years ago , but he does n't remember who gave it to him or why , though he wears it often for good luck . As he sleeps , calls out to him to remember . The next morning , wakes up to find a note from to tell them to go home without him . He has to go somewhere first . travels to , and finds his way to the shrine of family , still intact . He travels inside and finds the sake and her sister left . thinks if he drinks some of her sake , he can make one last connection and perhaps save her . drinks some , but as he stands up , he trips and falls . As he does , he takes a journey , and sees all of 's life ; her birth , happiness with her parents , the birth of her sister , the illness and death of her mother , her fathers abandonment of the family and his duties , her grandmother caring for them , and her death by the comet . wakes up in 's body . He realizes he has one last chance . Seeing the television , he realizes it is the day of the comet , and the towns destruction . Trying to talk to , realizes that someone else inhabits her granddaughter , as she had a similar phenomenon happen to her when she was younger . wonders if family line had these connections . ( as ) tells about the comet but is told no one will believe them . Undeterred , finds 's friends and and tell them what will happen . Despite doubting what they have been told , they believe her enough to help . They make a plan to knock out the towns power with explosives taken from 's father 's construction company . then will get on the emergency broadcast station and tell everyone to evacuate to the school , well out of the blast radius of the comet . However , they will need to convince the mayor , , of the severity . goes to 's father , but all the man can see is that his daughter has gone insane and orders her to see a doctor . , grabs him by the tie and screams , You son of a --- but they both stop . Who are you ? asks , also seeing that his daughter is not standing before him . Nevertheless , the warning falls on deaf ears . , thinking his body with inside is near the , races up there to meet her . Meanwhile , wakes up in 's body in the present day and sees the town destroyed . Does that mean I died ? she asks . Mitsuha remembers the day she went to , hoping to meet , thinking that even though they were technically strangers , if they were to meet , they would know their connection . By chance she met him on the train , though he did not recognize her ( as their connection would only begin 3 years after her death ) . , she leaves the train , but senses something and calls out to her . She takes out her braid and flings it to him , asking him to remember her name . She was the one who gave him the braid and thus linked them together . and finally are at the shrine , but can not see each other , being separated by time itself . However , during the in a certain spot , they can finally see each other , and meet for the first time . returns her braid and she ties up her hair . suggests they write each other names on their hands so they wo nt forget . writes his , but when she goes to write her name , the connection is broken . wakes up , back in his body , on the outskirts of the still destroyed . He can not remember why he came there , or the name of a girl that haunts him . He heads home to . Back in the past , , knowing what will happen enacts her plan with her friends . They blow up the power grid with explosives , switching on emergency power . then tells the entire town of forest fires in an effort to get people to the school . Though some take heed of the warning , not enough people do . Plus , the is trying to figure out who is sending out this false warning . Eventually , is caught and the warning is turned off . Katsuhiko tells that unless she is able to convince her father , everything is lost . Mitsuha begins to run , but becomes increasingly despondent as she can not remember name . She trips and falls , looking at her hand . She sees that , instead of writing his name , wrote I LOVE YOU instead . Shocked and in tears , she continues to run , before reuniting with her father in a building . The comet fragment still hits the town , destroying years later ... has graduated from high school and college , and is now trying to enter the work force as an architect . However , his passionate and idealistic views on preserving cities in case of disasters make him look foolish to interviewers , which lead him to get few if any offers . gets a call from , asking to meet up . They catch up , and she mentions they day they went to . says he does nt remember much of that day or why he was momentarily obsessed with the town . It turns out that reality has changed . was able to convince her father of the danger . That on top of her daring plan , led to the entire town to be evacuated to an area outside of the blast radius . The town was decimated , yet no one died . Still , has no idea of his connection to averting a tragedy or the girl he help save . As they part , tells that she hopes he one day finds happiness . notes the same , though it has felt as if he has spent years searching for it , yearning for something , or rather someone . In a diner , he hears a couple bicker over wedding plans . We see it is and , who survived thanks to and . feels a momentary feeling of connection , but brushes it off as nothing . , not knowing why fully , searches the streets every day for a woman whose hair is tied up with a specific braid . At one point , and cross paths in the street , but do nt look back , deciding their weird feelings are nothing . One day , finally , they see each other on different subways . Though they are not sure why , they feel a connection . After getting off , they scramble around the city , searching for each other . sees a woman at the top of a staircase and passes her by , as she walks down . Once again , they feel a stirring and almost ignore it once more . However , can not take it anymore and calls out to the woman . It is . He asks if they have met before . looks at him with tears in her eyes . She says that she feels the same way . Simultaneously , they ask , " Can I ask you your name?"We are left to infer they will recover their memories and finally be together , in > 

 < synopsis > ( ) is a popular silent film star with humble roots as a singer , dancer and stunt man . barely tolerates his vapid , shallow leading lady , ( ) , who has convinced herself that the fake romance their studio concocted and publicized is real . One day , to escape from overenthusiastic fans , jumps into a passing car driven by ( ) . She drops him off , but not before claiming to be a stage actress and sneering at his undignified accomplishments as a cinema actor . Later , at a party , the head of 's studio , ( ) , shows a short demonstration of a talking picture , but his guests are unimpressed . runs into again at the party . To his amusement and her embarrassment , he discovers that is only a chorus girl , part of the entertainment . Furious , she throws a pie at him , only to hit right in the face . Later , makes up with and they begin falling in love . After the first talking picture , The , proves to be a smash hit , decides he has no choice but to convert the new and film , The , into a talkie . The production is beset with difficulties ( most , if not all , taken from real life ) , by far the worst being 's comically grating voice . A test screening is a disaster . In one scene , for instance , repeats " I love you " to over and over , to the audience 's derisive laughter ( a reference to a scene by in his first talkie[2]).Don 's best friend , ( ) , comes up with the idea to 's voice with 's and they persuade to turn The into a musical called The . When finds out that is dubbing her voice , she is furious and does everything possible to sabotage the romance between and . She is even more irate when she discovers that will receive screen credit and a big publicity campaign , so she blackmails into withholding credit , and , later , demands that ( a contract player ) continue to do so in the future . The premiere of The Dueling is a tremendous success . When the audience clamors for to sing live , , and improvise and get to lip - synch while sings into a second microphone while hidden behind the curtain . Unbeknownst to , as she starts " singing " , , and gleefully open the curtain behind her , revealing the deception flees in embarrassment . When tries to run away as well , has her stopped and introduces the audience to " the real star of the . and start singing a love song . Final cue of they both kissing in front of a huge billboard advertising the film " ' in the Rain " with and > 

 < synopsis > ( ) , ( ) , and " " ( ) are three engineering students who share a room in a hostel at the of , one of the best colleges in . While and are average students from modest backgrounds , is from a rich family . wants to become a wildlife photographer , but has joined engineering college to fulfil his father 's wish . Raju on the other hand wants to uplift his family fortunes . is a wealthy genius who studies for the sheer joy of it . However , 's passion is for knowledge and taking apart and building machines rather than the conventional obsession of the other students with exam ranks . With his different approach incurs the wrath of dean of college , ( ) ( ) . irritates his lecturers by giving creative and unorthodox answers , and confronts after fellow student hangs himself in his dormitory room . had requested an extension on his major project on compassionate groundshis father had suffered a refused , saying that he himself was completely unmoved by his own son 's accidental death after being hit by a train . Rancho denounces the race , dog - eat - dog , mindless rote learning mentality of the institution , blaming it for 's death . Threatened by 's talent and free spirit , labels him an " idiot " and attempts on a number of occasions to destroy his friendship with and , warning them and their parents to steer clear of . In contrast , model student is or " " , ( ) who sees a high rank at the prestigious college as his ticket to higher social status , corporate power , and therefore wealth . Chatur conforms to the expectations of the system . Rancho humiliates , who is awarded the honour of making a speech at an award ceremony , by substituting obscenities into the text , which has been written by the librarian . As expected , mindlessly memorises the speech , without noticing that anything is amiss , partly aided by his lack of knowledge on . His speech becomes the laughing stock of the audience , infuriating the authorities in the process . Meanwhile , also falls in love with ' medical student daughter ( ) when he , and crash her sister 's wedding banquet in order to get a free meal , in the process further infuriating ViruS.Meanwhile , the three students continue to anger , although continues to come first in every exam , while is always second , and and are inevitably in the last two positions . The tensions come to a head when the three friends , who are already drunk , break into 's house at night to allow to propose to , and then urinate on a door inside the compound before running away when senses intruders . The next day , threatens to expel lest he talks on the other two . Unable to choose between betraying his friend or letting down his family , jumps out of the 3rd floor window and lands on a courtyard , but after extensive care from and his roommates , awakes from a coma . The experience has changed and , and they adopt 's outlook . decides to pursue his love of photography , while takes an unexpected approach for an interview for a corporate job . He attends in plaster and a wheelchair and gives a series of non - conformal and frank answers . However , is unsympathetic and vows to make the final exam as hard as possible so that is unable to graduate . Pia hears him and angrily confronts him , and when gives the same ruthless reply he gives to his students , she denounces him in the same way that did over the suicide of . Pia reveals that 's son and her brother was not killed in an accident but committed suicide in front of a train and left a letter because had forced him to pursue a career in engineering over his love for literature ; always mentioned that he unsympathetically failed his son on the ICE entrance exams over and over to every new intake of ICE students . After this , Pia walks out on the family home , and takes 's spare keys with her . She tells of the exam , and he and break into 's office and steals the exam and give it to , who with his new - found attitude , is unconcerned with the prospect of failing , and refuses to cheat and throws the paper away . However , catches the trio and expels them on the spot . However , they earn a reprieve when 's pregnant elder daughter ( ) goes into labour at the same time . A heavy storm cuts all power and traffic , and Pia is still in self - imposed exile , so she instructs to deliver the baby in the college common room via , after restores power using car batteries and a power inverter that had dreamed up and had mocked . then delivers the baby with the help of a cobbled - together extractor . After the baby is apparently stillborn , resuscitates it . ViruS reconciles with and his friends and allows them to take their final exams and they graduate . comes first and is awarded 's pen , which the professor had been keeping for decades before finding a brilliant enough student to gift it to . Their story is framed as intermittent flashbacks from the present day , ten years after vowed revenge on for embarrassing him at the speech night and promised to become more successful than a decade later . Having lost contact with , who disappeared during the graduation party and went into seclusion , and begin a journey to find him . They are joined by , now a wealthy and successful businessman , who joins them , brazenly confident that he has surpassed . is also looking to seal a deal with a famous scientist and prospective business associate named . sees , who has hundreds of patents , as his ticket to further social prestige . When they find 's house , they walk into his father 's funeral , and find a completely different . After accusing the new man of stealing their friend 's identity and profiting from his intellect , the host pulls a gun on them , but and turn the tables by seizing the father 's ashes and threatening to flush them down the toilet . The householder capitulates and says that their friend was a destitute servant boy who loved learning , while he , the , was a lazy wealthy child who disliked study , so the family agreed to let the servant boy study in 's place instead of labouring . In return , the real would pocket the qualifications and the benefits thereof , while the impersonator would sever all contact with the world and start a new life . The real reveals that his impersonator is now a schoolteacher in . and then find Pia , and take her from her wedding day to by performing the same tricks with his material possessions , and having turn up to the ceremony disguised as the groom and eloping with in public . When they arrive in , they see a group of enthusiastic children who are motivated by love of knowledge . Pia and the fake rekindle their love , while mocks and abuses the schoolteacher before walking away . When his friends ask what his real name is , he reveals that it and phones , who has turned his back , to turn around and meet his prospective business partner . is horrified and falls to his knees , accepts his defeat and continues to plead his case with to establish the business relationship he was after.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) and ( ) are two friends who live in , . They regularly do various drugs paid for by such petty thefts as pawning his mother 's TV set . ( ) , 's mother , is a widow living alone in who must regularly buy back her TV set from the pawn shop owner , ( ) . tries to get to turn in , but she does n't have the heart for it , as is all she has left after the death of her husband , , twenty years prior . and eventually come up with a plan to make money by reselling heroin on the street so that they can get away from their dead - end lives . Over the summer , they make a fair amount of money . They talk regularly about buying a pound of extremely pure heroin as their ' big score ' that will give them comfortable lives when they invest that money in a legal business . ( ) , who is 's girlfriend , has a distant relationship with her parents ( who are never seen on camera ) , but sometimes goes out with ( ) , her psychiatrist , in order to appease them . She , along with and , snort and shoot heroin and cocaine , drop speed , and talk a lot about their dreams for a better future . As starts earning money , he and talk about opening a clothing store where can earn a living as a clothing designer . Meanwhile , is a TV junkie , obsessed with an infomercial hosted by self - help guru ( ) , based on the acronym JUICE ( Join In ) . One day she receives a mysterious call from someone who claims that she has been selected to appear on a TV show . Thinking she 's being invited to appear on the infomercial , is suddenly obsessed with the idea of flaunting on the show before a national audience . She wants to wear a particular red dress that she wore at 's high school graduation ; a dress that loved to see her in . However , she is now too overweight to fit into it . One of 's friends , with whom she sometimes sits outside her apartment , gives her a diet book ; but of course the " grapefruit and coffee " diet leaves her constantly hungry . She then hears about a way to lose a lot of weight by taking certain medications from a doctor , so she decides to try it . Tyrone and have made a lot of money by dealing drugs , gradually filling up a shoe box hides in a wall in his apartment . Gazing at the money in the shoe box , he reminisces about running home and into his mother 's arms before making love to his girlfriend . As summer progresses to fall , so do the debilitating effects of the drugs that , , , and use . The money that and had saved starts to dwindle . First , buys a large , new TV / entertainment set . Tyrone gets caught in the middle of a drug gang assassination , lands in jail and needs to be bailed out . While visiting to tell her about the new TV set he 's gotten her , finds out that the diet pills that is taking are methamphetamine ' uppers , ' or ' speed , ' and warns her of the dangers involved . However , delivers a passionate monologue about how her upcoming television appearance is giving her a new lease on life . leaves in a taxi , shattered emotionally by his mother 's situation , but he wo n't do anything to prevent her addiction growing . Eventually , , and all run out of both drugs and money . Without money they can not buy more drugs . pleads with to ask for $ 2,000 so that and can make a purchase from a notorious mob figure . As fears , wants her to sleep with him in return , and she reluctantly complies with 's acceptance . At the site of the drug deal , a scuffle breaks out among buyers trying to push ahead in the line , and the supplier opens fire before driving away , leaving several people -- included -- without any drugs . loses weight gradually , the zipper on her dress coming tantalizingly closer to zipping up completely . But she also develops a tolerance for the pills that lead her to continually increase her dosage without consulting her doctor , and she slips into drug - induced psychosis that causes her to experience hallucinations involving her refrigerator , which get more and more intense . begins to regularly hallucinate that she is the guest of honor on ' infomercial and gets to speak with the man himself . 's relationship with starts to crumble when the need for drugs starts to overcome their sensibilities and the love they have for each other . Marion blames for the failed purchase from the mob figure . After one major fight , gives her a phone number for a major dealer named ( ) , who he heard about from . and could n't buy from because he was more interested in ' pussy ' than money . also discovers a black spot on his arm where he injects the heroin . Fall fades into winter . As a result of increasing drug gang violence and police crackdowns , and can not find any heroin in the city , so they decide to drive to to make a purchase . Marion goes through severe deprivation withdrawal and she tearfully begs and 's regular contact , , for help , but he rebuffs her because she is broke . In desperation , she calls and goes to his house . Although she is hesitant for a moment , she gives him a blow job in return for a fix . Pleased with her performance , invites her to a big orgy event at his house later in the week . The invitation for to appear on TV has not arrived , and her hallucinations with the refrigerator reach a climax as she takes more and more pills , thinking they will make the refrigerator stop . But instead , she finally hallucinates that the refrigerator lurches through the kitchen straight towards her and opens a wide toothy mouth . runs from her apartment in fear , wearing no winter coat even though shoveled snow lines both sides of the streets . She wanders in a stupor , gets on the subway and finds her way to a television station , begging to know when she will be on television . The receptionist and TV executives stall for time so they can contact paramedics who take her to a mental hospital . As and are headed to , the black spot on 's arm grows to an alarming size and he begins complaining about the pain . Tyrone drives to a hospital . One look at 's arm and the triage doctor knows that is a drug addict . He discreetly excuses himself taking all drugs with him and calls the county 's department , taking the medicine and drugs which were previously lying around with him , just in case . Tyrone and are arrested and sent to jail , where is subjected to racist guards and punishing work detail . uses his phone call to contact Marion . She begs him to come home right away , and he promises her he will , but she knows he is lying . As they speak on the phone , is getting dressed up to attend 's party . At the mental hospital , refuses treatment and refuses to eat , and her psychosis only deepens . Still delusional , she unwittingly and unknowingly signs an authorization for doctors to put her through electro - shock therapy . While clearing prisoners for work detail , a prison doctor finds 's arm has become almost completely black and gives off a foul odor , and the pain is too much for to bear . He is sent to the prison infirmary , where the doctors quickly determine they must immediately cut off 's arm at the shoulder to save his life . At 's party , engages in a variety of sex acts including an ' ass to ' with another woman . has a dream of running toward a smiling Marion as she waits for him on a pier , and then awakens in a hospital ward with a beautiful , kind nurse ( ) watching over him . Hearing him speak 's name , the nurse promises to contact her and arrange to have her come see him . But knows she will not come ; he knows he 's lost her . Marion arrives home from 's party , clutching a large plastic bag to her breast ; she 's been paid very well and likes her enough to be her supplier as long as she pleases him . She lies down on her couch and smiles blissfully . Tyrone and several other prisoners are ushered into a common cell after work detail and lies down on a cot , exhausted , with only a pillow and no blanket . Two of 's friends visit her at the mental hospital , and are so horrified and shocked at the sight of her as a hollow shell of her former self that they sob uncontrollably in each others ' arms while waiting for their bus back home . All four main characters are shown curling up in a fetal position : in the hospital bed with his arm amputated , on her couch after gaining a regular drug supplier in return for her favors , Tyrone on a cot in prison as he dreams of his childhood and his mother , and in a bed at the mental hospital . The movie closes with having another hallucination where she is a grand prize winner on the show , wearing her red dress and looking beautiful ; showing off , who in her dreams , has become a successful businessman engaged to marry , to a cheering audience.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > A wealthy businessman is told his son has been kidnapped and he will have to pay a very large sum for him to be returned safely . It is then discovered that his son is safe at home : the kidnapper took his chauffeur 's son by accident . The kidnapper says this makes no difference : pay up or the child dies . This leaves him with a moral dilemma , as he really needs the money to conclude a very important business deal.grantss</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( voice : ) is 17 years old , and is heading off to college in a few days . The fact that has grown from a young boy to a teenager about to leave home has not been lost on his toys . Several of them hold out hope that will play with them at least once before he leaves , but those hopes are soon dashed . As the toys take stock of how many are left , and those that they have lost over the years , their attention is drawn to the last of the little green : ( voice : ) and two paratroopers . Fearful of being thrown away , they leap out the window into the world beyond , their parachutes taking them who knows where . This idea soon fills the heads of the remaining toys : ( voice : ) , ( voice : ) , ( voice : ) , ( voice : ) , ( voice : ) , ( voice : ) , three alien squeak toys from , ( voice : ) , ( voice : ) , and the ( voice : are of the persuasion that is right , and they 'll be tossed out soon , but believes that would n't do that . He figures will store them in the attic ... maybe one day to be played with again when has kids of his own . The toys ' " staff meeting " is cut short when returns to his room with his mom ( voice : ) in tow . With only a few days left until he leaves , has not cleaned up his room . 's mom is having 's sister ( voice : ) clean her room as well , and tells the two to throw out what they do n't want , store extra items in the attic , or donate items to Sunnyside . From 's room , the toys watch as throws her doll ( voice : ) in the donations box , along with some other toys . finally takes out a black trash bag and begins to put his old toys into it . When he gets to and , he hesitates before putting in a box marked ' College ' and tossing in the black trash bag . Inside , the toys think they are going to be thrown away , and Woody watches as leaves the room . His panic turns to relief as he sees open the attic door . However , before can go up , he helps Molly move the donations box downstairs . The lapse causes the attic door to close , and 's soon after finds the trash bag with the toys . Thinking left trash lying around , she takes it with another bag to the curb . Woody looks down the street in horror as the garbage truck slowly makes its way to the curb . Woody jumps out the window and slides down a pipe to the front lawn ... only to see the trash bags thrown into the garbage truck and crushed ! Shortly thereafter , notices a recycling bin walking towards the garage . Following it , he is relieved to see that his friends escaped . However , they are now all convinced that meant to throw them away . Woody tries to explain what really happened , but most of them just feel that he is in denial . soon notices the box of donations to Sunnyside , and proposes that they all go there . Everyone eagerly jumps in , except for , who demands that they all return to 's room right away . Before he can say anymore , the trunk to the family mini - van closes , and 's mom takes the box to . At Sunnyside , 's mom brings the toys in to the . Looking through the handle - hole in the box , the toys are excited to see a group of children happily playing with the toys in the room . After the recess bell sounds and the kids leave the room , the toys eagerly escape from the box , only to meet a very friendly group of toys who are excited to see them . The group is soon joined by a strawberry - scented bear named ( voice : ) , who soon calls his associate ( voice : ) to escort the group around , showing them what has to offer . During the tour becomes smitten with ... who finds herself drawn to him as well . explains that the toys are taken care of , and that due to a never - ending supply of kids coming and going , the toys will never be without someone to play with them . 's toys eagerly accompany over to the , where he then leaves them to experience their first playtime at . However , and appear to have gotten along quite well , and eagerly goes back with and to the . explains that while does seem great , he strongly believes they should go back to . asks to come back , but refuses , saying they should stick together . Realizing that the others wo n't accompany him , sneaks out of , but not before accidentally losing his hat . In the process , a little girl named ( voice : ) finds him and takes him home with her . Back in the , recess ends , and the toys get their first playtime ... only to find the room filled with noisy screaming toddlers , each of them rambunctious and not as ' delicate ' as was . They are thrown around , smashed about and covered with poster paint by the toddlers . Once the daycare closes , the toys feel there has been some mistake and that they should be in the instead . manages to get out of the room , intending to talk to . However , once outside , his attention is drawn to and several other toys sneaking inside a vending machine . follows them , but is caught by a sleepy - eyed doll named . and the others take to the daycare 's library and tie him up . Suddenly , comes across the other toys , and demands that they let go . thanks for helping him out , and makes his request for himself and the other toys to be transferred . admires 's initiative , but is only willing to consider to have him join the inhabitants . When refuses , orders held down and procures a instruction manual from the library . Using it , the group of toys sets to " demo " mode   he 's once again the deluded space ranger we met early in the story - leluelm ( 1995)Lotso , his compatriots , and demo - return to the , where subdues his friends and places them in prison - like storage cages . explains how the daycare is run : all newcomers start in the with the ill - behaved toddlers . If they survive , they move up to the where they 'll be treated better . To set an example about what happens to troublemakers , has take out to the playground and stuff him in " the " ( a sandbox ) . Also as a warning , produces 's hat , although he does n't explain what happened to the toys ' friend . realizes that lied to her and as she refuses to be part of 's regime , she 's imprisoned as well . During the toys ' day at Sunnyside , has been in 's house , taking part in her imaginative fun and games . Woody grows excited to be part of a real playtime again , but longs to get back to . Once the household is asleep , 's toys help Woody access the family computer . Woody is relieved to find that 's house is just around the corner . He thanks the toys and tells them that if ever outgrows them , they should go to . However , the name causes the toys to look on in fear . The toys explain that is responsible , and one of 's toys named ( voice : ) begins to tell a story . , , and were once owned by a little girl named . Of the three , she loved the most . However , one day at a rest stop , the three toys were accidentally left behind . The three eventually made it back to 's house . and managed to look in her window , only to see that had been replaced . , resentful of being left behind , declared they had all been replaced ( even though there was only proof that he had been replaced ) . still wanted to go back , but yelled " She does n't love you no more , " and tore off a necklace around 's neck : a plastic heart that said " I belong to . " Secretly , kept it . The three toys went from place to place until they found Sunnyside . took over and set up the system in which most new toys would be subjected to the rough handling of the toddlers in the and would not survive . Chuckles explains that he eventually was broken at , and took him in and repaired him . Realizing the danger his friends are in , decides to return to Sunnyside and rescue them . The next day , Woody sneaks into the daycare and moves around the building above the ceiling tiles . Finding his way into a hidden area of the , he chances upon a - Price ( voice : ) . The telephone tells that he should have stayed gone , and that there 's no way that he and his friends can get out . Woody thanks him for the concern , but says they have to try . The explains what and his friends will be up against : 's minions manning search lights on the playground , trucks patrolling the halls and the playground , an 8 - foot - high cinderblock wall , and a cymbal - clanging monkey ( voice : again ) that monitors the security cameras in the building . The telephone says the only other way out is through a garbage chute across the playground . Once the toddlers have gone to recess , joins his friends , who tell him that was reset to demo mode , and now they want to get back to . Woody sets his plan in motion . Later that evening , the group springs into action : creates a scene to get put in the box again , this time as a way to get outside and report for the group . pleads with that she ca n't take being imprisoned , and lets her out . He takes her back to his dream house , where subdues him , and using one of his outfits as a disguise , infiltrates the daycare library to find the instruction manual for . and infiltrate the main security room and take down the cymbal - clanging monkey . and start a fight to distract , allowing to escape . Then they trap under a plastic tub . The toys regroup and set about trying to get back to normal . However , a mistake in resetting sets him to Spanish mode . With little time left , the group decides to worry about fixing him later , and they set out for the garbage chute . The gang gets to the end of the chute before plummeting into the dumpster ... only to find , , and his associates waiting ( along with the chatter telephone , now broken by the bad toys ) . offers the toys a choice : either end up in the dumpster , or return to the daycare . and both decry what has done to the daycare , and even soon turns against . The eagerness of the group and to return to incites to declare that love does n't exist . It is then that mentions and produces the tag that kept . sees the tag , and declares that she did n't love them and replaced them . Woody reminds that it was only him she replaced . This revelation causes to reach for the tag before destroys it , yelling at for being stupid and believing that loved him . , feeling betrayed , then throws in the dumpster . The other toys begin to run across the lid , but one of the aliens ' feet gets stuck in the lid . Woody goes to help him , only to have grab his hand . The others rush to help , but just then , a dump truck pulls up and empties the contents of the dumpster ( including 's toys ) into the collecting bin in the back . and , who were not on the dumpster 's lid , can only watch as their friends are taken from them . Inside the dumpster , more trash is emptied onto the group , and a TV set falls on   which sets him back to his proper self . However , before the toys can rejoice , the truck arrives at the landfill . They 're shocked when a bulldozer scoops up the three aliens , carrying them away ! The remaining toys are shoveled by another machine onto a moving conveyor belt , headed towards a large shredding machine . The toys avoid being shredded by grabbing metal objects that are being magnetized to an overhead track . and even manage to save , who thanks them . Once they make it through , they find themselves on another conveyor belt , heading towards what looks like daylight . However , as they draw closer , they soon realize it 's a large pit that empties into a fiery incinerator . The toys try to outrun their fiery fate until notices an emergency stop switch . He motions for the others to help him , and they hoist him up to stop the machine . However , once he reaches the button , just smirks at , muttering " Where 's your kid now , ? " and runs off . The toys are soon unable to keep running , and tumble into the pit . They try to climb out , but there appears to be no escape . With no hope left , the toys all join hands , willing to stay together to the very end . Suddenly , a blue light appears overhead , and a giant claw falls down , scooping up the group . As they wonder who rescued them , the enormous claw swings by the glass cabin of the machine , where the three aliens are . Once the group gets out , they thank their saviors and wonder what became of . Unknown to them , is found by another garbageman at the dump . Remembering that he had a Lots - a - ' as a kid , he ties to the grille of his dump truck and he heads off for duty . 's toys find the dump truck that services 's neighborhood and manage to get back before leaves for college . After cleaning themselves up , they sneak back into the house , finding 's room cleaned out , except for some minimal items , and two boxes : one marked ' , ' the other ' . 's friends pile into the ' ' box , and say their goodbyes . Hearing and his mom approaching , hops in the ' ' box . As they enter 's room , his mother is hit with the sad reality that her son is going away . tells her that even though he 'll be gone , he 'll still care about her . Hearing this , realizes that can still care for him and the other toys : an example of true love , in that you never forget those you really love . While is distracted by his sister and his dog , grabs a - It note and a marker and writes down 's street address . He takes the Post It with him and hops into the ' ' box . Andy returns to the room and sees the note on the ' ' box . Thinking that his mom wrote it , takes the box to the address and sees playing in her family 's front yard with the same quirky imagination that he had . gets out of the car with his box . As sees him approach , she stops her game and calls for her mom . 's mom ( voice : ) recognizes , who explains that he has some toys for . introduces each of his toys , telling a little bit about each of them , since he still remembers how he played with them : for example , saves your money but is also the evil . With each toy revealed , gets more and more brave , until after , she peeks into the box and sees . has no knowledge of how got in there , but is surprised when calls him " my cowboy doll , " and quotes one of 's lines : " There 's a snake in my boot!"Andy sees looking at , and explains to her how important is to him : how long he 's had him , and how brave can be . However , he explains to that she can have , if she promises to take good care of him , and the other toys . When she quietly nods an affirmative , begins to play with her , and the two are having an imaginative time with their toys . Secretly , 's toys are overjoyed at their last playtime with him . Finally , gets into his car , as gathers her old and new toys on the porch . As she holds and in her little arms , she makes Woody wave goodbye . This causes to give a sad but calming smile . " Thanks , guys , " he whispers , as he drives off . After leaves , 's mom takes her inside for lunch , leaving the toys on the porch , watching 's car fade into the distance down the street . " So long , partner , " says . Woody smiles at the other toys , reaffirming that did care for them , and care for them enough to leave them with another child who will take care of them and give them many playtimes to come . Woody introduces his friends to 's other toys . Some time afterward , the toys find a note in 's backpack from . In the time since has been gone , and have worked to abolish the unfair system that ran Sunnyside , and now the toys have an equal opportunity to move between the and rooms . The toys at now enjoy their time there , and soon after , and his two paratroopers arrive , with both and welcoming > 

 < synopsis > ( " " ) tells the story of ( - ) , a Lebanese boy who sues his parents for the " crime " of giving him life . The film follows as he journeys from , child to hardened 12 - year - old " adult " fleeing his negligent parents , surviving through his wits on the streets , where he meets Ethiopian migrant worker , who provides him with shelter and food , as takes care of her baby son in return . later gets jailed for committing a violent crime , and finally seeks justice in a courtroom.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The opening crawl reveals that 's friends are engaged in a mission to rescue the smuggler from the and that the is building a new armored space station which is even larger and more powerful than the first . Near the forest moon of the new is being constructed in orbit , and a command star destroyer arrives and launches a shuttle with a fighter escort -- a shuttle bearing the of the . Fearing his arrival , the commander of the new informs ( , voice : ) that the station will be operational on schedule , but when challenges this " optimistic " appraisal of the situation , the commander admits that he needs more men to accelerate construction . , however , informs the commander that the ( ) will be arriving soon , and that he is most displeased with the commander 's progress . , the commander commits to redoubling construction efforts . , pleased , remarks , " the is not as forgiving as I am . ( ) , ( ) , ( ) , ( ) , ( ) , and - ( ) return to to rescue ( who was encased in carbonite at the end of vastaisku ( 1980 ) ) from the gangster the ( voice : ) . sends and - to 's desert palace to deliver a message : In a hologram projected by , offers to bargain with for himself -- if does not , he will be destroyed . laughs at the message and refuses to give up his " favorite decoration : " , frozen in carbonite , hangs on a wall in 's court . The two droids are sent to 's workshop where is given the job of 's translator and will be a drink - server on 's sail barge . Disguised as a bounty hunter named , arrives in 's court with in cuffs . She offers him to for a sizable bounty . After dickers with over the amount and threatens him with a small thermal detonator , happily agrees to pay , impressed with the bounty hunter 's nerve , and is imprisoned . That night , sneaks into 's court and frees from the carbonite . However , she and are both captured by . is imprisoned with and keeps on display in a metal bikini and chains . arrives with a final ultimatum to release . again refuses and drops through a trap door into a pit below his throne that houses the rancor , a fearsome beast that keeps for executions . As watches in horror , she sees disguised as a palace guard . After a brief battle , defeats the rancor , enraging , who declares that , and will be slowly consumed by the sarlacc -- a huge , shark - toothed , tentacled maw at the bottom of the of . The group is taken to the pit on 's sail barge fleet , and sadistically attempts to draw out the spectacle by inviting them to grovel for their lives . and refuse , but calmly notes to the gangster that he is about to pay dearly for his arrogance to 's scoffing amusement . The group is prepared for execution : is the first , pushed out onto a thin plank over the pit . gives R2 a short salute and drops off the plank , only to spin and grab the plank to launch himself back on board . At that moment , catapults a small object , 's new lightsaber , to the 's hand . A battle erupts , with steadily taking the fight to 's men . During the battle , strangles with the chain around her neck and with - 's help escapes from her bonds . Solo accidentally knocks ( ) into the sarlacc pit . is also thrown off one of the skiffs , hanging by a few cables until he 's rescued from the sarlacc itself by and . , having fought his way onto 's sail barge , has the escaping aim the deck cannon at the vehicle and sets it on automatic fire ; the sail barge soon blows apart . Our heroes manage to escape before it explodes , retrieve and and zip off into the desert . flies off Tatooine in his X - Wing fighter and the rest of the band fly away in the to rendezvous with the fleet near . A massive fleet of fighters completely surrounds the boarding bays of the at the arrival of the . As slowly descend from the Imperial shuttle and flank its ramp , and the commander kneel to their master , the last to enter the hangar . He insists that will soon capture , and will learn of the dark side of the when brought before himself . returns to to complete his training , but he finds ( voice : ) is ill . He tells that no further training is required and all that remains to be done is to confront . attempts to get independent confirmation of 's claim to be 's father , but is evasive . Finally , begs to tell him the truth , and , emotional torture clearly evident on his normally serene features , confirms 's darkest fears . He correctly infers that has used this information as an emotional weapon against , and criticizes for having faced prematurely , with nearly disastrous consequences . He reminds of the true nature of the , and of the soul - corrupting nature of the dark side . then issues a dark warning , telling how his father fell to the shadow : he was corrupted by the powers and influence of the . If allows himself to be manipulated by this dark mind , then he too shall become what he most fears . Finally , charges with keeping alive the teachings and knowledge of the and the , urging him to start with his own family , with whom the is unusually strong . With his final breath , tells that there is " another . " dies at peace , and before 's astonished eyes , his body vanishes , passing with his spirit into the . The spirit of - ( ) confronts a distraught , confirming that was once , a who was turned to the dark side of the . Obi - confesses to that he made mistakes in 's training , especially by not deferring to , and takes responsibility for indirectly creating the evil . counters that even now , all is not lost , that some part of remains , if only someone can reach it . When asks about the other , - tells him that has a twin sister , hidden from and separated from at birth to protect them both from the . intuits that his sister is . - confirms it , but warns that in the eyes of the , all bonds of love and caring are potential weaknesses to be exploited . Meanwhile , the entire fleet is massing their near , meeting to devise an attack strategy on the uncompleted . As part of the attack , and his companions must land on the forest moon of and deactivate the generator that projects a protective shield up to the orbiting . The team , led by , will use a stolen Imperial shuttle and confirmation code to infiltrate the heavy security measures protecting the construction site before the rest of the fleet arrives . arrives at the meeting and tells and that he 'll join them on the dangerous commando mission . The fleet 's assault on the will be lead by , piloting the , which will fly into the core of the space station and destroy the main power generator . The team arrives at in the stolen shuttle and uses the confirmation code to sneak past the Imperial fleet . senses that is aboard the Imperial fleet 's largest ship , the super - star destroyer , and believes he 's endangering the mission . tells him not to worry . When they arrive on the moon , the team happens across a small unit of Imperial biker scouts . tries to sneak up on the scouts to disarm them but draws their attention when he steps on a branch . and jump on speeder bikes and pursue two more scouts through the forest at high speed . They overtake them both but are separated ; 's bike crashes into a tree after she jumps off and she falls unconscious . jumps off his own bike and battles with the the scout he 'd been pursuing , forcing him to crash using his lightsaber . When rejoins the team , he finds that has n't returned . The team looks for her but is captured by indigenous creatures called -- short , furry , intelligent forest dwellers . An called ( ) befriends , but the other who captured the rest of the party decide to sacrifice them to , who they believe is a . , having mastered the , levitates to impress the with the droid 's power and scare them into giving up the sacrifice . With the help of , and his party form an alliance with the , whose stone - age technology has unexpectedly effective military applications . Later , decides that the time has come for him to face . He confesses to that he is her brother , and that he has to try to save the man who was once their father . She tells him to ignore his feelings and leave but tells her that he must face his destiny and if necessary in the event that he falls , she must learn the ways of the to help oppose the . surrenders peacefully to but fails to convince his father to abandon the dark side even though is left subtly shaken by his matured son 's own mind games . They go to the to meet the , who reveals that the is walking into a trap . On the forest moon , the led by and enter the shield generator control facility only to be taken prisoner by a large legion of Imperial troops . Once they are led out of the bunker , however , the spring a surprise counterattack . In a desperate ground battle , the and fight the Imperial forces . Aboard the , the attempts to seduce with the powers of the dark side . The reveals his plan : the information that spies had stolen was part of an elaborate plan to draw out the fleet and command so they could be eliminated in one battle . As 's anger builds he attacks the with his lightsaber , only to be stopped by 's crimson blade . During the strike team 's assault , the fleet emerges from hyperspace for the battle over , only to discover that the shield of the is still functioning . An intense space battle takes place as the Imperial fleet , in the second phase of the 's plan , appears and attacks the fleet . During the battle , the is revealed to be operational ; its superlaser , revealed to be relatively rapid - fire on a low setting compared to its predecessor , is fired at the fleet and obliterates a star cruiser . Though wants to abandon the attack , convinces him that they must give and his party more time on . The fleet regroups and begins to engage the Imperial fleet of star destroyers directly . On the , the taunts to give in to his anger . A ferocious lightsaber has erupted between and his father . In the midst of combat , reads 's feelings and learns that has a twin sister . When toys with the notion of turning to the dark side , gives in to his rage and furiously gains the upper hand in the battle , slicing off 's right robotic hand in a rage in one swift cut , and makes his father succumb to defeat at the mercy of his son 's blade . Despite the 's goading refuses to kill his father , realizing that he is traveling down his father 's path towards the dark side , and declares himself a . Realizing that can not be turned , the uses lightning against him to torture and attempt to kill him . Deeply affected by the sight of his son dying before him , repents and turns on the , throwing him down a reactor shaft to his death . At the same time , however , the 's lightning causes fatal injuries to ( ) and short - circuits his breathing system . Stopping momentarily in a landing bay , asks to take his mask off , knowing that he 'll die , but desiring to look at his son 's face with his human eyes . removes the helmet , revealing the pale and scarred face of his father ( ) . says that was right about him , and asks to tell his sister . With those final words , dies . Back on , the strike team finally destroys the shield generator . The fleet seizes the opportunity to launch a final assault on the in space . Meanwhile to by the attackers more time , orders a concentrated attack on the Imperial fleet 's flagship , the . With a crashing rebel pilot ramming into the ship 's bridge , not only is killed , but the ship goes out of control and collides with the . leads ( ) and his fighter group into the bowels of the , where they fire at the main reactor , causing its collapse . , with the body and armor of , escapes the in an Imperial shuttle . Moments later , in his X - and in the emerge from the just as the space station explodes . On , tries to reassure that was likely not on the destroyed station , but already senses that is true . Guessing 's feelings for , offers to step aside for him to court her . However , reassures of her love and reveals to him that is actually her brother , who obviously will support their own romance to 's astonished relief . That evening , cremates the remains of his father in a funeral pyre on . The entire galaxy celebrates the fall of the and the victory over the . , , , , and the rest of the rebels , along with the , celebrate the victory as well . During the celebration , catches sight of the spirit figures of - , , and the redeemed , who look proudly upon him.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > To ' tone poem " , " the title sequence shows the sun rising behind the , which is behind the moon . The of a sere African landscape , a group of ape - like hominids and some tapirs compete for the meagre green plants . A leopard attacks an ape . While one group of apes is drinking at a waterhole , another group approaches ; the two groups scream at each other and one party is driven off . At night the apes huddle in fear among the rocks . In the morning a tall , thin , rectangular black monolith stands among the rocks . The apes are excited but touch the object and calm down . ( Soundtrack : 's " . ")An ape ( ) lifts a femur bone from a skeletal pile and realizes it makes a fine weapon . ( Soundtrack : " Thus " again . ) The ape realizes that it can destroy other bones with the club . Three turning points in evolution happen simultaneously : proto - humans learn to kill with weapons , to hunt using weapons and eat meat , and to walk upright . Club - carrying apes approach the group that drove them away from their waterhole . The club - carriers bludgeon the other group 's alpha male to death and chase off the rest . The victorious alpha male throws his club and it spins into the air . , or the on the Moon(No title card introduces this section of the spinning bone segues to spaceships above . A - Am space shuttle approaches a large spinning space station , its revolutions mirroring those of the ape 's spinning bone . As a single passenger dozes in his seat , a flight attendant with shoes recovers his floating pen . The shuttle pilots carefully match rotation and steer the shuttle into the station 's central docking . ( Soundtrack : ' waltz.)Dr . ( ) meets an old friend in the arrivals lounge . They go through a voiceprint security check in which identifies his destination : the moon . The men chat ; has a connecting flight in one hour . calls home from a video payphone booth and talks to his young daughter ( ) , whose birthday is the next day . He 's sorry he 'll miss her party but asks her what sort of present she wants ; she asks for a - baby . The cost of the call is $ the lounge , stops to chat with some Russian scientists on their way back to . When mentions he is going to , the say no one has had contact with for 10 days and there are rumors of an epidemic . says he can not discuss the matter and goes on his way . A smaller spaceship approaches the moon . A flight attendant serves food trays that consist of many compartments of liquid nourishment labeled with pictures -- carrots , peas , and so on . sips his meal , talks briefly with one of the flight officers , then contemplates the long list of instructions for the zero - G toilet . He watches the moon approach . The craft lands in a domed landing pad then descends underground to the main complex , once again to ' stately Viennese waltz . is introduced to a group of people in a conference room . He congratulates them on their discovery . He tries to explain the need for secrecy and the epidemic cover story . has come to get more facts and write a report for " the . shuttle skims over the lunar landscape . Inside , and two scientists enjoy sandwiches and review the findings . A magnetic object was found and excavated . They 're not sure what it is , only that it was deliberately buried four million years ago . At the site , a tall , thin , black rectangular monolith -- identical to the one the apes encountered -- is examined by six people in spacesuits . ( Soundtrack : 's " " again . ) As they pose for a photo the object emits a loud , high - pitched noise and the astronauts grab their heads in pain . 18 Months long narrow spacecraft moves through space , its parabolic antennae pointing backwards . In the crew compartment , ( ) jogs around the artificial gravity wheel . Along the narrow corridor formed by the edge of the wheel , he runs past work stations , communications equipment , and five large , coffin - like life support chambers with glass covers . Two are unoccupied and three hold white , sarcophagus - shaped pods containing hibernating members of the crew . is joined by ( ) . The two men have a meal and watch a news video from earlier that day . The news report is about them and their ship , the , 80 million miles from . The report mentions the three astronauts who are in hibernation to save air and food ; they will be needed at the destination for a survey . The sixth member of the crew is the computer , which can talk and mimic the human brain . The newscaster interviews and together and then speaks to ( ) , who states he is foolproof and incapable of error . catches some UV rays on a tanning bed and watches a video birthday greeting from his parents . also wishes a happy birthday . and play chess -- Hal wins . sketches and shows his artwork to . The computer expresses some concern about the mission and secrecy . Hal then announces there is a problem with the AE-35 unit and it will fail with 100 % certainty within 72 hours . and discuss the problem with ; they need to " go " ( outside the ship -- extra - vehicular activity ) to replace the unit . goes out in a spherical pod to the parabolic dish antennae in the center of the long ship . He leaves the pod and swaps out the black box from a service panel . Later the two astronauts scan the removed AE-35 unit but ca n't find any defects . suggests putting it back in service to let it fail . believes has made an error because their unit , a twin to the one aboard , finds no flaw in the AE-35 . says that similar problems in the past have always proved not to be his fault ( " It can only be attributable to human error " ) and denies any chance of computer error . and go to a pod to have a private chat under the ruse of looking at a communications problem . turns off all the pod 's communications switches and the two men share their worries about . If the AE-35 unit does n't fail as predicted , the astronauts decide to disable 's higher functions without disturbing the automatic ship control functions , which says will be tricky to do . also wonders how will react , because no 9000 unit has ever been disconnected before . can see the men through the pod 's window and reads their lips . This time goes out in the pod . As approaches the dish assembly the sneaks up behind him . Suddenly is spinning off into space fumbling for his air , which is disconnected , and the pod is drifting in the other direction . As tumbles away , his voluntary movements slow and stop . goes to the bay as says he does n't know what happened . uses a pod to recover 's body . While he 's away , a computer malfunction alert goes off and the life signs of the three hibernating astronauts flat - line . A display reads " Life functions terminated . " refuses to open the doors for , explaining that he knows is planning to disconnect him because he was able to read and 's lips when they discussed it . He says the mission is too important to allow humans to jeopardize it . says he 'll return to the ship through the airlock ; replies that will find that difficult without his helmet -- which , indeed , forgot in his hurry to go after . ends the conversation . releases 's body and maneuvers the pod to the emergency airlock hatch . He uses the pod 's arms to open the door , then lines up the pod 's hatch with the opening . holds his breath and jumps over to the ship , where he 's tossed around by escaping air before he 's able to close the hatch . Now in a helmet , goes to the computer room and climbs into an access compartment . Hal pleads for himself as pulls crystals from the memory center . 's voice gets lower and slower as he sings " " ( , , give me your answer do , I 'm half crazy all for the love of you ) , and fades out as he is completely shut down . ( 's performance is a nod to a speech synthesis project at in which an 704 was programmed to sing the same song . ) Suddenly a video screen comes on and plays a recording of explaining the secret purpose of the mission : " This is a prerecorded briefing made prior to your departure and which for security reasons of the highest importance has been known on board during the mission only by your computer . Now that you are in 's space and the entire crew is revived it can be told to you . Eighteen months ago , the first evidence of intelligent life off the was discovered . It was buried 40 feet below the lunar surface near the crater . Except for a single very powerful radio emission aimed at , the four - million - year - old black monolith has remained completely inert . Its origin and purpose are still a total mystery . and Beyond the to , another black monolith floats among the many moons . We hear 's " " once again . leaves the in another pod . As the monolith and moons align , a psychedelic light show begins and the pod enters a wormhole to the music of 's " . " sees a series of oddly - colored landscapes as if he was flying over them . The pod ends up somewhere in time and space in a bedroom with a luminous white floor and furniture in the style of . gets out , now a trembling grey - haired man . Next door in a similarly styled bathroom , looks at himself in a mirror . Back in the bedroom someone is sitting at a table eating . It 's again , now much older and dressed in a dark velour robe . has a drink of wine ; the glass falls to the floor and breaks . Another man lies sleeping on the bed . It is a still older , who stirs and raises an arm . The black monolith appears in the center of the room . is transformed into a fetus in a sac . Floating in space , the large open - eyed fetus -- the -- gazes at the nearby . Soundtrack : " Thus . "</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) is an emotionally withdrawn man and ( ) is his girlfriend who is a dysfunctional free spirit . They are inexplicably attracted to each other despite their different personalities . They do not realize it at the time , but they are former lovers now separated after two years together . After a nasty fight , has had her memories of their relationship erased from her mind . Upon learning this , is devastated and goes to the doctor to have the same procedure done . However , while unconscious , has second thoughts and decides he wants to keep his memories of . Much of the film takes place in 's brain as he tries to find a way to preserve his memories of , and two techies ( ) and ( ) try to erase the memories . We watch their love and courtship go in reverse : The memories are slowly erased while tries his best to resist the procedure and hide inside his mind . In separate and related story arcs , the employees of are revealed to be more than peripheral characters in scenes which further show the harm caused by the memory - altering procedure . ( ) has had an affair with the married , who heads the company ( ) . She agreed to have the affair erased from her memory when his wife discovered the relationship . Lonely , socially inept becomes fixated on and uses 's personal mementos that he gave to as part of the procedure in order to seduce her . These romantic entanglements turn out to have a critical effect on the main story line of the relationship between and . Once learns of the affair she has had with , she steals the company 's records and sends them to all of its clients . Thus and both get to listen to their initial tape recordings at , and afterwards realize that even if everything in life is n't perfect , their relationship can still be worthwhile.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The film opens with eight men eating breakfast at a diner . Six of them wear matching black suits and ties and are using aliases : ( ) , ( ) , ( director ) , ( ) , ( ) , and ( ) . Among them is the elderly gangster ( ) , and his beefy son , " " ( ) . discusses his comparative analysis on 's " Like a " . mentions that he 's been listening to a local rock radio program called - 's of the 70s ( hosted by the voice of ) and has been hearing songs that have n't been played in years . 's senior moments involving an old address book rankle ; grabs the book away from and refuses to give it back until stops talking endlessly about it . When it comes time for to pay the bill for the meal he tells everyone to throw in a dollar for the tip . explains that he does n't tip and defends his anti - tipping policy until angrily convinces him to contribute with the group . After the opening credits , the action cuts to the interior of a speeding car . , driving with one hand , is trying to comfort laying in the back seat , who has been shot in the abdomen and is bleeding and screaming in pain . They arrive at an abandoned warehouse , the robbers ' rendezvous point . Orange begs to take him to an emergency room but refuses , saying that it takes a long time to die from an abdominal gunshot wound . leaves on the floor when appears , angrily suggesting that their robbery of a jeweler , orchestrated by , was a police set up , indicated by the rapid response of the police to the alarm . agrees , and they wearily get their stories straight with each other . The first of several flashbacks shows escaping from the jewelry store with the diamonds . While running down a street chased by three or four policemen , is hit by a car , out of which he drags out the woman driver and opens fire on the policemen hitting one or two of them before getting in the car and driving away . Back in the present . reveals to that was shot and killed by the police during the getaway , and the whereabouts of and are unknown to both . They agree to stay put for the time being . . short flashback shows meeting with and at 's office where he offers ( whose real name is ) , a low - time veteran criminal from , a job in an upcoming heist in a few months . agrees , hinting at 's long - time friendship with . In the present , after taking care of an unconscious , the two men discuss the actions of , who suddenly acted psychotic during the heist and murdered several civilians in the store after the alarm had been triggered . is angered about 's decision to employ such a violent individual and agrees about the possibility of a set up , while confesses to having hidden the diamonds in a secure location . However , they violently argue about whether or not to take the unconscious to a hospital when reveals that he had told the former his true first name , " " . , who has been watching them near the entrance , steps forward and ends the dispute . angrily chews out Blonde for his antics , while Blonde calmly defends himself , saying simply that he 'd warned the staff of the jeweler 's not to touch the alarm . He tells them not to leave the rendezvous as he 'd spoken to , who 's on his way . After everyone calms down , takes them to his car and opens the trunk to reveal a captured police officer named ( ) who he apparently took as a hostage to escape from the jewelry store . . flashback shows who meets with and at their office . The meeting reveals that became involved in the heist because of his friendship with . Blonde ( whose real name is ) had served four years in prison for armed robbery and had refused to give the authorities 's name for a lighter sentence . When he meets with and , they first arrange a job that will appease / 's parole officer -- and help sidestep contact with the man -- then suggests that Blonde join the crew they 're putting together for the jewel heist . Blonde enthusiastically accepts . In the present , , , and beat the policeman and demand that he reveal who the " rat " is . He protests that he does n't know . The beating continues until a furious arrives at the warehouse . After berating the men over the carnage and incompetence displayed at the heist , and telling them that beating wo n't get them closer to finding out anything , he orders and to assist him in retrieving the stolen diamonds and disposal of the two hijacked vehicles outside , which he thinks will attract attention . He orders to stay with and the dying . , and then leave the scene . When Blonde casually questions again , the policeman states that he has been a police officer for eight months and is ignorant as to a possible set up . He then pleads with to release him without further incident . However , Blonde confesses that he really is a sadist and psychopath who enjoys torture , and he is really uninterested in what the cop knows and what he does n't . He turns on the radio and dances to " Stuck in the With You " by before slashing 's face and severing his right ear with a straight razor . Blonde then retrieves a can of gasoline from the trunk of his stolen car , douses with it , making a small trail of the remaining gasoline in front of the policeman . Just as he is about to light the gasoline he is hit by several shots . had unexpectedly woken up and shoots Blonde several times to stop him from burning . With dead , and are now alone in the in the warehouse . reveals he is a police detective named . says he knows ( because he briefly met him several months earlier ) showing us that he had resisted the beating and torture so as not to reveal 's true identity . reassures that a massive police force is in position several blocks away but are waiting to move in when arrives . . lengthy flashback details 's involvement in an deep cover police operation to capture . / is shown meeting his handler ( ) one night at a local diner where he tells that he is in full with the gang after meeting and earlier that evening at a nightclub that owns , as well as describing a ( criminal informant ) down in about planting his false criminal past as a reference to be accepted . / also talks about whom he did not recognize as part of 's group . then asks / about something called " the " , which says that they bought it . Next , in further flashbacks - within - flashbacks , / is rehearsing his cover with as well as getting into character for his first meeting with involving the , rehearsing the " scene " like a professional actor to describe a part of his cover for his criminal past from the beaches in , to his apartment , to a rooftop scene with instructing to be on detail with the story to make it believable . / first meets , , and at a local nightclub where he tells them " the " ; a fabricated story ( shown in a completely fabricated flashback ) about being in a men 's room with a large bag full of . In the men 's room with him were four sheriffs with a German and explains about his coolness under pressure , knowing the dog can smell the marijuana . The group is wholly amused and accepts him into their gang . Later , then goes with , , and Pink on a drive where they discuss their favorite movie soundtracks and about movies from the 1970s and tells them a story about how a black waitress at one of 's nightclubs got even with her abusive husband as well as how black women seem to be more abused and temper angry than white women . / mostly stays out of the conversation , somewhat offended by , and 's racist talk involving ( mostly since his friend and handler is black ) . They are silently being tailed by unseen police detectives from 's apartment to the warehouse hideaway . At the warehouse , meets with all of the members of the gang where he angrily tells them that their joking camaraderie might get them in trouble if they do n't take the heist seriously . He gives them their aliases to be used and to go over details about the upcoming robbery of a diamond store . A brief argument ensues when complains about his name . angrily tells them all that he decided previously that he himself picks everyone 's aliases to avoid arguments . regains his control over the meeting and they begin plotting the heist . After the meeting , develops a friendship with as they drive over to the jewelry store to discuss their roles in the upcoming robbery . tells about a few methods of crowd control he knows are foolproof . In another flashback to the robbery getaway , we see that was somehow shot in the head , and dies while driving their escape car with and in the back seat , which crashes into a parked car in an alleyway a short distance away from the jewelry store . watches helplessly while gets out of the car opens fire with his two semi - automatic handguns on an approaching police car and violently massacring both cops in the car . With now dead , and flee the scene and make it to another street . While attempting to steal another getaway car , it is revealed here that was shot in the stomach by the female driver of the car he and steal . reflexively shoots and kills the woman after she shoots him . Back in the present , , and Pink return to the warehouse to find Blonde dead . claims that was going to kill , and the rest of the gang so that he could take the diamonds for himself . Boiling over with rage , briefly reveals 's back story , that he was a close friend of his and a loyal soldier of his father 's . struggles to defend himself , which makes even angrier and he fatally shoots three times . himself arrives and , after informing the group that was killed by the police , confidently accuses of being an informant . comes to 's defense , alternately appealing and debating 's loyalty with . argues that all he needs to spot a traitor is his own instinct and draws his gun on . A Mexican standoff ensues ; draws on and draws on . They hold off for a few moments until yells at to stop pointing his pistol at . Everyone begins shooting , leaving and dead , and severely wounded , and mortally wounded . Pink , who hid to avoid the shootout , takes the cache of diamonds and flees the warehouse . As police sirens are heard outside , White cradles in his arms and reveals that he is in fact a detective . is devastated and he begins sobbing in frustration and points his gun at 's head as police can be heard outside . At that moment , the police can be heard raiding the warehouse ( with the camera in a close - up of 's face ) , demanding drop his gun ; he refuses and shoots , resulting in the police opening fire on just before the screen goes black.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The feature film directed by , shot in the genre of military drama . The action takes place on the territory of in 1943 . In the center of the story is a Belarusian boy , who witnesses the horrors of the Nazi punitive action , turning from a cheerful teenager into a gray - haired old man for two - ( - > 

 < synopsis > ( ) is a member of a close - knit Danish community and works at a local kindergarten . Divorced , he struggles to maintain a relationship with his teenage son , ( ) , who lives with his ex - wife , but enjoys wholesome interaction with the children at the kindergarten . His coworker ( ) makes advances towards him and eventually moves in as his girlfriend . One of the kindergarten pupils is ( ) , the daughter of ' best friend ( ) . Drawing on memory of a pornographic picture her brother showed her , she makes comments that lead the kindergarten director to believe indecently exposed himself to her . When interviewed with leading questions , gives unclear testimony against . The adults in the community believe the director 's story of abuse , dismissing 's later contradictions as denial . is shunned by the community as a pedophile sexual predator . His friendship with is destroyed , the pressure causes him to break up with , and his son is publicly ostracized . The kindergarten staff ask leading questions of other children at the kindergarten , who also " admit " to being abused . However , the children 's accounts mention details of 's basement , which supports 's innocence , as his house has no basement . After a hearing , he is released without charge . The community is still suspicious of , and the ostracism turns to violence . His dog , , is killed , a stone is thrown through his window , and he is beaten by grocery store employees when he tries to buy food . On , confronts during a church service . Later , overhears apologizing to as she drifts off to sleep . His doubts about ' innocence are resolved , and he visits him that night with food and alcohol as a peace offering . A year later , tensions in the community have lessened . and are in a relationship again , and ' son is accepted into the local hunting society as an adult . On a hunting expedition to mark the event , someone shoots at . Blinded by the setting sun , is unable to identify his attacker , who reloads but is then gone.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > It 's 1941 , and newspaper tycoon ( , who also directed and co - wrote the script ) is dead . The opening shots show , 's vast , elaborate , and now unkempt estate in . Interspersed with segments of his newsreel obituary are scenes from his life and death . Most puzzling are his last moments : clutching a snowglobe , he mutters the word " rosebud . " , whose life was news and whose newspapers not only reported but formed public opinion , was central to his time , a larger - than - life figure . The newsreel editor feels that until they know who or what is they wo n't have the whole story on . He assigns a reporter called ( ) to investigate . Thompson digs into 's life and hears a lot of stories , but none of them reveal the meaning of . The reporter sees ( ) , the tycoon 's ex - wife ; she 's drunk and wo n't speak to him . Then he reads the unpublished memoirs of ( ) , 's early financial adviser and guardian , who later became a prime target of the newspapers ' trust - busting attacks . In one of many flashbacks , the memoir shows 's mother signing guardianship of the boy and his fortune over to , despite his father 's objections . When objected violently to being sent away with , remarked , " what the kid needs is a good thrashing . " responded , " That 's why he 's going to be brought up where you ca n't get at him . " ( Some present - day fans of the film interpret this to mean that was abusive . 1940s audiences were more likely to have believed that was over - protective and that if had been allowed to grow up enjoying the love and discipline of his parents , his life would have turned out better.)Years later , as he was about to get control of his business affairs , 's interest in newspapers was piqued when he noticed that he owned the struggling . Do n't sell it , he famously wrote to : " I think it would be fun to run a newspaper " -- a statement that exasperates greatly . That exasperation grows even more when 's paper starts attacking 's traction interests as corrupt and they suffer as a result . confronted at the to talk him out attacking businesses that himself owns considerable stock in as well as throwing so much money away on low - class journalism such as instigating the Spanish - . However , defiantly told that he wanted to use journalism to protect the interests of ordinary people from the likes of and intended to use his personal resources to keep the newspaper running at an annual million dollar loss for 60 years if necessary . The scene shifts to an office at a time considerably sooner than 60 years later in which 's bankrupted media empire is placed under the control of . even - handedly noted that while would still be richer than him , his former ward never made significant investments with his money , but instead squandered much of it in buying things . ruefully speculated that if he not been so rich , he might have become a great man to become everything hates . Next , interviews ( ) , the general manager of 's newspaper empire . In further flashbacks , recalls how he , , and 's college friend ( ) took over the stuffy , unprofitable Inquirer and transformed it into a money - maker , eventually hiring the staff of the rival . At 's urging , seeks out , who recounts the story of 's first marriage ( to , ) and makes some negative comments about his one - time friend 's character . ( " was never brutal , he just did brutal things . " " He married for love -- that 's why he did everything . That 's why he went into politics . It seems we were n't enough . He wanted all the voters to love him , too . All he really wanted out of life was love . That 's 's story -- it 's the story of how he lost it . You see , he just did n't have any to give . " " He never believed in anything except . ")Leland goes on to describe 's second marriage , to . started seeing her while he was still married to , during his campaign for governor . He ran on an anti - corruption platform , promising to investigate and bring down his opponent , political boss ( ) . found out about and threatened to tell the press unless withdrew from the race . refused , the story came out , and he lost the election along with his first marriage . In the immediate aftermath of that defeat , , drunkenly incensed at humiliating his family and then treating the public 's political rejection of him as if they were his serfs , ask to be transferred to the newspaper to get away from him . He married ( who the non - Kane newspapers describe disparagingly as ' a " singer " ' ) soon after his divorce from was final . Although her singing talent was modest , was ambitious on his wife 's behalf . He paid for voice lessons , built an opera house in ( " Cost : three million dollars ! " the obituary notes ) , and financed an elaborate production for her debut . ( The work stars in is identified as in the newspaper coverage , but it 's a fictionalized version -- the music was written specially for . ) At the opening night performance , which was poorly received by the audience to the point where is quickly left alone applauding his wife 's performance . arrived at the offices of the to find drunk again and passed out over his typewriter , his cheek resting on his unfinished -- and very negative -- review of 's performance . finished the review in the same negative vein and ran it in all his papers , but fired . wanted to quit , but insisted she keep performing until a suicide attempt convinced him she needed to give up singing . ( By this time is interviewing couple moved to and went to work on ( " Cost : no man knows " ) , where most of the remaining scenes are set . 's 49,000 - acre " private pleasure ground , " ostensibly built for , includes a man - made mountain , a golf course , vast gardens , a zoo , and , of course , a mansion . In a huge , echoing , and nearly empty stone hall , did jigsaw puzzles and longed to be in . declined to leave , but did arrange an event he called a picnic , involving an overnight stay in the , a large animal spit - roasted over a fire , richly furnished tents , musicians , and many guests . In their tent , accused him of trying to buy love , despite never loving anyone but himself , and of never giving her anything that mattered ; he slapped her . Shortly thereafter she left him . She almost wavered in her resolve to go when he begged her not to , saying she 'd have everything her own way . However , he then turned the emphasis back on himself , saying " you ca n't do this to me . " At that , angrily realized the inherent selfishness behind that statement and defiantly walked out on him . From the ' butler ( ) , hears how trashed 's room after she left but stopped when he came across the snowglobe ( which we recognize from the deathbed scene ) . As pocketed the snowglobe , heard him say " rosebud . " has no idea what it means . However , he tells that he was in the room to hear say " rosebud " again just before he died . In 's big stone hall , the reporters are getting ready to leave . The place is jammed with packing crates full of art and household goods , some valuable , some not . ( There 's a shot of all the crates that 's a clear ancestor of the warehouse shot at the end of of the ) explains to the other reporters that he never found the meaning of , but that it does n't matter . " I do n't think it explains anything . I do n't think any word explains a man 's life . "The camera pans across the crates and finds the sled that played with in the scene where his parents turned him over to ; the word is stenciled on it . In the final scene , men are tossing trash into an incinerator . says , " Throw that junk in , too , " and in goes the sled , probably the only thing that always stayed with . was a man who got everything and then again lost everything , must 've been something he lost or something he wanted but never got " . The flames consume it . In an exterior shot , the camera pulls back from the smoking chimney to the chain - link fence with the " No trespassing " sign with which the movie opened , and then to 's " " gate.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > It 's noon . Concerned parents are lined up outside the schools waiting to escort their kids home for lunch . Signs along the street ask " ist der ? " ( Who is the murderer ? ) of eight children killed over the past year . Little [ ] has just become victim number nine . Who is the murderer ? It could be anyone ( the viewer knows that it is [ ] ) . Neighbors are turning in neighbors and fingering strangers in the street just for talking to a child . The police are on the job 24 hours a day , but all they have turned up so far is some cigarette butts , some sugar grains , and a bag that held candy . They have investigated over 1,500 clues and have compiled 60 volumes of documents . Every thicket , every bush , every hole in the area has been combed . Every place from houses to underworld hangouts are being raided every night . In fact , the police investigation has been so thorough that the is getting worried about the shakedowns . Underworld boss [ ] has come to the conclusion that the child killer must be found before the police ruin business . After a lengthy discussion with all the bosses in attendance [ there is a wonderful scenario where the bosses discuss strategies while the police do the same , such that it hard to tell the difference between and ] , they decide that the best solution is to monitor all children at all times and that the best persons to do that , the only ones who can be seen on the streets without arousing suspicions , are beggars . So , every street has its beggar sitting in a doorway , having a smoke on the corner , watching the children and noting anyone following or with a child . A break comes in the person of a blind balloon peddlar [ ] who hears a man whistling a tune and remembers the same tune being whistled by a man who purchased a balloon on the day was murdered . He alerts his block 's beggar , who follows the , who is leading a little girl into a candy store . When makes the mistake of throwing an orange peel on the sidewalk , the beggar pretends to slip on it and , while clutching for support , he transfers onto the back of 's shoulder a big " M " that he previously chalked on his palm . The beggars are now able to follow the man with the " " on his coat . Meanwhile , the police have been attempting to trace the origin of a postcard sent by the child killer to the local newspaper . While investigating released criminals and mental patients that fit the profile of the killer ( lazy , indolent , and of strong and pathological sexuality ) , the police come to 's apartment . Beckert is n't home , but the landlady shows them in . Searching 's room , they find some cigarettes and a red pencil , the likes of which was used to write the postcard . Certain that is the killer , the police lay in wait for to return . But is on the make . The little girl that he is with suddenly notices the " " on his shoulder and offers to wipe it off . Certain that he has been caught , runs into an office building . The beggars contact who sends a group of gangsters to comb the building and capture the child killer . Unfortunately , the night watchman sounds an alarm , alerting the police . In the minutes before the police arrive , the gangsters find , and everyone , except for burglar [ ] , manages to get out before the police arrive . To make sing , lies to him that the night watchman at the building was killed during the gangsters ' raid . The strategy has the desired effect . Fearing that he is going to face a murder rap , tells how the gangsters have captured the child killer and taken him to an abandoned distillery to stand trial . Meanwhile , in the basement of the abandoned distillery a kangaroo court is in session , comprising of the leaders and the members of the various criminal organizations . When explains to that he is driven by a voice and an evil impulse he ca n't control , it is voted to eliminate him so that there is no chance of him ever getting free to murder another child . Only 's appointed defense counsel [ ] argues that , since is driven by an uncontrollable impulse , he can not be held responsible for his actions and should be turned over to the police so that the state can render him harmless . At that moment , the police enter the distillery and escort away . Epilogue : As 's real trial progresses , the mothers of the slain children listen to the verdict . The ultimate and final comment comes from [ ] who says that none of this will bring back the children and that mothers must keep a closer watch over them . [ Original synopsis by bj_kuehl]</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > In 1935 , ( ) is killed in a motorcycle accident . At his memorial service at 's , a reporter tries to gain insights into this remarkable , enigmatic man from those who knew him , with little success . During the , is a misfit lieutenant stationed in , notable for his insolence and knowledge . Over the objections of ( ) , he is sent by ( ) of the to assess the prospects of ( ) in his revolt against the . On the journey , his guide is killed by ( ) for drinking from a well without permission . later meets ( ) , who orders him to keep quiet , make his assessment of 's camp , and leave . promptly ignores 's commands when he meets . His knowledge and outspokenness pique the 's interest . advises to retreat to after a major defeat , but proposes a daring surprise attack on which , if successful , would provide a port from which the could offload much - needed supplies . While strongly fortified against a naval assault , the town is lightly defended on the landward side . He convinces to provide fifty men , led by a sceptical . Two teenage orphans , ( ) and ( ) , attach themselves to as his servants . They cross the , considered impassable even by the , travelling day and night on the last stage to reach water . ( ) succumbs to fatigue and falls off his camel unnoticed during the night . The rest make it to an oasis , but turns back for the lost man . , won over , burns 's British uniform and gives him Arab robes to wear . persuades ( ) , the leader of the powerful local tribe , to turn against the . 's plan is almost derailed when one of 's men kills one of 's because of a blood feud . Since retaliation would shatter the fragile alliance , declares that he will execute the murderer himself . Stunned to discover that the culprit is , he shoots him anyway . The next morning , the intact alliance overruns the Turkish garrison . heads to to inform and the new commander , ( ) , of his victory . During the crossing of the , dies when he stumbles into quicksand . is promoted to major and given arms and money to support the . He is deeply disturbed , confessing that he enjoyed executing , but brushes aside his qualms . He asks whether there is any basis for the ' suspicions that the have designs on . Pressed , the general states they have no such designs . INTERMISSIONLawrence launches a guerrilla war , blowing up trains and harassing the at every turn . American war correspondent ( ) publicises his exploits , making him world famous . On one raid , is badly injured . Unwilling to leave him to be tortured , is forced to shoot him before fleeing . When scouts the enemy - held city of with , he is taken , along with several Arab residents , to the Turkish ( ) . is stripped , ogled and prodded . For striking out at the , he is severely flogged , then thrown out into the street . is so traumatised by the experience that he abandons all of his exploits , going from having proclaimed himself a , to insisting he is merely a man . He attempts to return to the British forces and swear off the desert , but he never fits in there . In , urges him to support his " big push " on , but is a changed , tormented man , unwilling to return . After insists that has a destiny , he finally relents . naively believes that the warriors will come for him rather than for money . He recruits an army , mainly killers , mercenaries , and cutthroats motivated by money , rather than the Arab cause . They sight a column of retreating Turkish soldiers who have just slaughtered the people of the village of . One of 's men from the village demands , " No prisoners ! " When hesitates , the man charges the alone and is killed . takes up the dead man 's cry , resulting in a massacre in which himself participates with relish . Afterward , he realises the horrible consequences of what he has done . His men then take ahead of 's forces . The set up a council to administer the city , but they are tribesmen , ill - suited for such a task . The various tribes argue among themselves and in spite of 's insistence , can not unite against the , who in the end take the city back under their bureaucracy . Unable to maintain the utilities and bickering constantly with each other , they soon abandon most of the city to the . Promoted to colonel and immediately ordered home , his usefulness at an end to both and the British diplomats , a dejected is driven away in a staff car.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > At the end of an ordinary work day , advertising executive ( ) hurries from a office building to a business meeting at the bar of the . After asking his secretary to phone his mother , he realizes that she wo n't be able to reach her by telephone , so he will need to send a telegram instead . When a hotel pageboy passes by calling for a , flags him down , to inquire about sending a telegram . Unfortunately , this also draws the attention of two henchmen , names ( ) and ( ) , who mistake for because from the vantage point they are standing at , he appears to be answering the page . As steps into the corridor to send his wire , the henchmen abduct at gunpoint and force him into a waiting car . Wordlessly , they drive him out of to a country estate displaying the name " " at its entrance . The car snakes up a long winding driveway to the front entrance . A maid lets them in the front door , and is locked inside the library of the mansion . Left alone , he finds a newspaper on the desk addressed to " , 169 , , N.Y."Shortly , the library door opens and there enters an urbane - accented gentleman ( ) , evidently none other than Townsend himself , followed soon after by his personal secretary , ( ) . The gentleman addresses his captive as " , " and by his questions , can only assume that the real must be some sort of secret agent on this man 's trail . tries to convince him that his name is and has never been anything else , but his skeptic captor will not hear of it . To " prove " his point , the man proceeds to recite the elusive 's recent itinerary of hotels , cities , and ever - changing hometowns , including 's present occupancy of room 796 at the , and his future stops in the next few days in and , . To find out how much " " knows about his organization and their current arrangements , he puts in charge of extracting the information while he withdraws to join ( ) and their party guests . unseals a fifth of bourbon taken from a liquor cabinet , and with the aid of and , he begins to force the whiskey down 's throat . Having failed to get any information from their victim , and place the severely intoxicated behind the wheel of a on a seaside highway under cover of darkness , planning to guide him off of a cliff to his death . Almost unaware of his surroundings , comes sufficiently alert at the last moment to push out of the car and start driving for himself . The two thugs follow him down the winding highway in their own car . , on the verge of passing out and plagued with double vision , manages to careen his way down the cliffside highway without hitting anything . As he slams on brakes to barely avoid running over a bicyclist , a pursuing police car plows into the rear of the , and a third car plows into the rear of the police car . Finding themselves overmatched , the two henchmen drive away leaving in police custody . tells everyone at the police station how his captors had tried to kill him , but in his drunken condition no one pays any attention to his bizarre story . One of the policemen mentions that the was driving was reported stolen . phones his mother to let her know he is at the police station for the night . In the morning , and his attorney ( ) face the judge , with 's mother , ( ) , looking on in weary bemusement . The judge gives a chance to prove his doubtful story , and continues the case over to the next day . A pair of county detectives accompanies , his mother , and to the house where he says last night 's events took place . They are escorted into the same library while the same maid goes for . shows them the sofa which should still be stained and soaked with spilled bourbon , but it has apparently been cleaned . He opens the liquor cabinet , only to find it is full of books . When " " comes in , she greets like an old friend , and asks if he had gotten home all right . She says that he had been so drunk when he left their party the night before , that they had all been worried about him . When ( ) mentions the stolen car registered to a , asks , " You did n't borrow 's Mercedes ? " suggests that they question her husband . informs them that he is at the where he will be addressing the that afternoon . As his protests continue to fall on deaf ears , his mother chimes in , " , pay the two dollars ! " The visitors get back into the car and drive away . Behind them , a gardener looks up from his work . It is , disguised . and his mother take a cab to the , where tries to phone 's room . But he learns that has n't answered his phone in two days . Rogers cajoles his mother into getting the key to room 796 from the front desk . They go upstairs and into 's room . Both the chambermaid and the valet treat him as , since he 's the man in room 796 whom they have never actually seen . finds a photo of his host from the evening before , which he slips into his pocket . The phone rings . answers it and hears the familiar voice of one of his recent captors . He then calls the hotel operator and learns that the call originated inside the hotel . hurries his mother out of the room , and as they enter an elevator going down , and step out of one coming up just in time to join the crowded group of passengers in the down elevator . To cut the tension on the way down , asks the two men if they are really going to kill her son . The thugs start laughing and gradually everyone in the car ( except ) joins in . When the doors open , insists , " Ladies first . " And under cover of escorting the ladies off the car , he manages to elude his pursuers and escape into the street . He jumps into a cab and asks the driver take him to the . Seeing the thugs following him , he asks the driver to lose them if he can . When he gets to the , asks for , giving his own name as . He is told to go to the public lounge where the attendant can page for him . Meanwhile , Valerian steps out of another taxi and tells to wait with the cab on the other side of the building for him . then walks into the . When ( ) answers the page , he is not the same man had seen the evening before . asks him about the house in , which says is his , but the house is currently locked up with only the gardener and his wife living on the grounds ( implying it to be Valerian and the house maid ) . Townsend says that he always stays in the city when the is in session . asks about and learns that she has been dead for many years . As shows him the picture of his captor , Townsend flinches and begins to collapse . has thrown a knife across the lounge and flees unnoticed , and falls dead at 's feet . Reflexively , pulls the knife out of 's back just as people begin to look at the commotion , and a photographer 's light bulb goes off . It appears to everyone around him that has killed the real ! drops the knife , bolts to the exit and jumps into a taxicab . The next morning , the action changes to inside the boardroom of a government intelligence agency in where a group of planners remark about the photo of " murderer " on the front page of a newspaper . They consider how to deal with the sudden appearance of a man who has been mistaken for the non - existent . It is revealed that these agents invented a non - existent agent named " " as a decoy for their real agent who has infiltrated an enemy group headed by a man named . They 've succeeded in making believe that their phantom " " is the real agent , by creating a trail of hotel registrations complete with prop clothing and other personal belongings moved in and out of the various hotel rooms by fellow agents . And now has somehow mistaken for . The intelligence chief , a middle - aged gentleman called the ( ) suggests that the agency do nothing to help . If they try to help him , they risk exposing their real agent who would probably be killed . For the time being , they will simply wait and let this real - life " " ( ) lend credibility to their invented " . "Meanwhile back in , calls his mother from to tell her he 's taking the train to . He has learned that checked out of the and has gone on to the in , so is following him there to find out what is going on . He tries to buy a ticket on the 20th , but the ticket agent recognizes him and quietly calls security . slips away unseen , makes his way to the platform , and boards the 20th without a ticket , closely pursued by police . Colliding with a beautiful young woman ( ) in the train corridor , he ducks into a nearby compartment as the police appear at the other end of the corridor . The woman misdirects the police off of the train as it gets underway . As time passes , manages to elude the conductors while they tally up the passenger count . Then he makes his way to the dining car , where the steward seats him with the same beautiful young woman who had helped him in the corridor earlier . She introduces herself as . He gives her a false name , but she answers : " No . You 're of , and you 're wanted for murder on every front page in . Do n't be so modest . " But she assures him she wo n't turn him in , since it 's going to be a long night and she does n't particularly like the book she 's started . He lights her cigarette from his personally monogrammed " R - O - T " matchbook . " . What does the ' O ' stand for ? " she asks . He tells her , " Nothing . " When he admits he does n't have a ticket , she invites him to share her drawing room , just as the train comes to an unscheduled stop . Two men in plain clothes get out of a police car and board the train . and leave the dining car to make their way to her compartment . Presently , is lying on the lower berth while talks to her from his hiding place in the closed upper berth . A knock comes at the door , and the two police detectives enter and question her about the man she was talking with at dinner . She deflects their questions , saying she 'd never seen him before , and that they had n't talked about anything important . They leave to continue their search . Using a key she had stolen earlier from a porter , opens the upper berth to let out . As the evening progresses , and become very close very quickly , falling in love in spite of not knowing much about each other . A buzz at the door announces the porter , who is ready to make 's bed for her . hides in the washroom while the porter is there , and returns the berth key to the porter , telling him that she had found it on the floor . The porter leaves . Since there 's only one bed , insists that is going to sleep on the floor as they return to their interrupted embrace . In another part of the train , the porter delivers a note into the hand of , who passes it to his boss . The note reads , " What do I do with him in the morning ? . "In the morning , and get off the train in with dressed in a redcap 's uniform and carrying her luggage . He walks ahead as the two police detectives stop and ask if she has anything to report . She does n't , and she rejoins . She is also aware of and walking a short ways behind . She tells to change back into his suit which she 's hidden on one of her cases , while she calls for him . The police soon discover a redcap who is missing his uniform , and they begin to examine every redcap porter in the station trying to find . ducks into the men 's room , quickly changes , and starts to shave with a very tiny travel razor from the train 's washroom . The police walk right past him , not recognizing him through the shaving cream on his face . Meanwhile , in a phone booth is making notes , while in another booth several booths away is giving instructions into the phone . and leave their booths at the same time , taking no notice of each other . When joins her , she says that wants him to take the bus and to get off at a stop known as , where will meet him at 3:30 .. He asks how he can find her again later . , for some reason , is clearly nervous . She looks toward an empty doorway and tells him , " They 're coming ! " He hurries away . That afternoon , steps off the bus in the midst of a vast open prairie and begins to wait . An occasional car or truck drives by , with long empty intervals between them . Looking around , notices a nearby corn field , and a crop duster at work in the distance . And still he waits . A man gets out of a car on the opposite side of the road . Thinking he might be , approaches . But the man is just waiting for the next bus . The man comments on the crop duster , observing that it seems to be dusting where there are n't any crops . After the man gets on the next bus , is left alone again . The crop dusting plane approaches , swooping low over 's position . It comes around and approaches again , strafing the ground with machine gun fire . tries to flag down a car , but it does n't stop . The plane strafes again , and runs into the corn field , hiding among the tall stalks . The plane 's first pass over the field accomplishes nothing , and begins to think he 's eluded them . On its next pass the plane drops pesticide over the field . Gasping for breath , has to abandon the cover of the corn stalks . He sees a gasoline tanker truck approaching , and he stands in its way forcing it to stop , which it does barely in time , knocking him to the ground unhurt . The tanker 's quick stop presents a sudden obstacle to the low - swooping plane , and it flies headlong into the load of gasoline , bursting into flames . and the drivers flee the truck moments before the second gas tank explodes . Some passersbys stop to view the accident scene , and steals a pickup truck from one of them and drives away . The stolen pickup is next seen that evening parked on a street . inquires at the front desk of the for 's room number , only to learn that had checked out that morning at 7:10 a.m. , leaving a forwarding address for the - in , . ca n't understand how he could have gotten the message that morning at 9:10 a.m. if had already left . Standing in confusion for a moment , spots , of all people , entering the lobby . She picks up a newspaper and takes the elevator to the fourth floor . tells the desk clerk that is expecting him in room 4 - something - or - other , he ca n't remember the whole number . The clerk tells him rings the buzzer at room 463 , and is admitted by a surprised . She runs into his arms , apparently happy to see him alive , but he keeps his barriers up . also notices a newspaper detailing the crop dust plane crash into the tanker truck killing both men aboard the plane . plans to stick with and not let her out of his sight , but says that she has plans of her own . The phone rings . tells the caller that she will meet them , jotting an address on a memo pad . She tears off the note and places it into her purse , where she also carries a small handgun . insists on having dinner with her , but she tells him to leave and never see her again . Last night was all there was , they 're not going to get involved . He keeps insisting that they have dinner first . She gives in , on the condition that he have the hotel valet clean up his dusty suit . goes into the bathroom to shower , and he passes his trousers out to her . The valet takes his suit away . Then slips away , not knowing that was faking the shower and was watching her . He uses a pencil to shade over the impressions on the top blank sheet of the memo pad , revealing the address she had jotted down as " 1212 . few hours later , wearing his own suit again , steps out of a taxi at 1212 to find an art auction underway in the gallery at that address . In the crowd , sits under the attentive and watchful eye of 's recent captor , the false " , " with standing close by . / puts his hand on 's shoulder , apparently as a clear sign of affection , and he smiles at her while she smiles back . Consumed by anger and jealousy , approaches the trio , and his accusatory tone causes the suspicious " Townsend " to draw away from . She becomes alarmed . Just then an unusual primitive figurine goes up for sale . " Townsend " bids on the sculpted figure , and when he wins the sale , learns that his name is . By now , has had enough of " , " and he tells to finish him off who walks off . This whole scene is observed by the who is lurking in the crowd . starts to leave , but blocks his way at the main entrance , while blocks the front stage.(Note : It is speculated here that 's other henchman , , was shooter in the crop duster plane which crashed along with the anonymous pilot aboard . Thus , , from this point , is never seen again in the movie.)As and make their exit , is trapped and must wait behind in the crowd . To manufacture an escape , begins to disrupt the auction , bidding wildly and making rude remarks about the art work . When the police finally arrive , starts a fight with a gallery employee to provoke an arrest . 's men can do nothing as the police lead him away . As they leave , the makes a quick phone call . When identifies himself as the killer on their way downtown , the policemen call the station for instructions . They are told to take him to the airport instead of police headquarters . At the , the arrives and takes off the policemen 's hands , and leads him out onto the tarmac to catch a plane to , , near . The explains that has a house near , and they think that will be his jumping off point to leave the country the following night . He explains that does not exist , but that he and his associates in need for to continue to play the role of for the next 24 hours , to assure that everything is all right . They want to continue on his journey so that they can learn more about his spy organization overseas and his dealings with smuggling government secrets in and out of the . learns that is the government 's undercover agent , and that the scene made at the art auction has put her life in jeopardy . 's harsh words , and 's candid reactions , had made it obvious to that his mistress is emotionally involved with a man he believes to be a government agent . For 's sake , agrees to co - operate with the to help set things right again . A meeting is set up between " " and in the cafeteria of the . While the stands hidden in the background , arrives with and . In exchange for not revealing 's plans to leave the country that night , asks to give over to him so that she can get what 's coming to her . reluctantly agrees . When takes hold of , she draws the handgun from her purse , shoots , and runs away . The emerges from the crowd , examines and shakes his head regretfully . prompts to leave before the authorities arrive . employees carry out on a stretcher , and the has him loaded into a vehicle . They drive away . The vehicle stops in a secluded wood where a very healthy steps out to find waiting for him . She had asked for this meeting so that they can clear the air . tells him that she had met some time ago at a party and fallen in love with him . Then the had contacted her and told her 's sordid secrets , asking her to use her unique relationship with to help the government , the first time anyone had ever asked to do anything important . is glad that it will all be over when takes off that night , and he and can go on with their lives . But she and the tell him that she will be going away with , because they still need her to find out more information about him . does n't want to let her go , and he tries to hold her back forcibly . But the 's driver knocks him down , and drives away to return to 's house . That evening , finds himself locked in a hospital room wearing next to nothing . The brings in a change of clothes for him to use for the next few days on his stay in the hospital . asks the if he could have some bourbon to help ease his stay , and agreeably the leaves to fetch the bourbon . quickly finishes dressing , climbs out the window and along a ledge , making his escape through the neighboring hospital room . He makes his way to 's house , where he sees lights flashing at a nearby landing strip as if someone is signaling an incoming plane . From outside the living room window , he overhears reassuring that everything is all right , and that the plane is about ten minutes away . asks to have a parting talk with in private . goes upstairs to get her things . notes that even though 's actions that afternoon had dispelled 's doubts , he still does n't trust her enough to tell her that the figurine they bought at the auction in holds a bellyful of microfilm . 's suspicions had been aroused by the scene at the . To prove his point , aims 's gun at and fires . But finds himself unhurt , just as must have been unhurt , because the gun is loaded with blanks . had searched 's luggage and found it and immediately knew it was a fake shooting . Not appreciating this cruel revelation from , punches him in the face . But quickly regains his composure and knows for certain now that has betrayed him , and that she is working with . He tells that the solution to this is simple : he will drop her from the plane over the ocean . has to warn . He climbs up to her balcony just as she leaves her room and returns downstairs . He jots a note inside the cover of his monogrammed matchbook saying , " They 're onto you . I 'm in your room . " From the upper landing , he tosses the matchbook down to her . It lands on the floor . She does n't see it . comes over to speak to her , and he picks up the matchbook , tossing it onto the coffee table as he walks away , not realizing its origins . Then recognizes it and reads the message . She makes an excuse and comes upstairs again . warns her that found the gun with the blanks , that they plan to do away with her , and that the figure from the auction is filled with microfilm . begs her not to get on that plane , but dutifully she goes downstairs again . The entourage leaves for the plane , and only the housekeeper , ( ) , remains downstairs . tries to slip out through the house , but the stops him at gunpoint . She tells him that after the plane leaves with , ( who is revealed to be 's husband ) , as well as will return . At the landing strip , is wavering about whether to get on the plane or not . As gives his goodbyes to and , he also tells them to say goodbye to his sister back in ( the same woman who impersonated for the authorities ) . Suddenly , shots ring out at the house , and as everyone turns to see fleeing the house , grabs the figure out of 's arms and runs away into the darkness toward . He has driven a car from the house toward the plane , and jumps into the car . They speed away . and give chase on foot . explains it took him five minutes to realize the housekeeper had been covering him with that same gun filled with blanks . They stop at the front gate , which is now closed and locked . Abandoning the car , they run into the dark woods . Before long they find themselves at the top of the monument , with and in hot pursuit . Seeing no other way out , they start climbing down the stone faces . and split up and start climbing down after them . Pausing for breath , suggests that if they get out of this alive , that they go back on the train together . asks if that was a proposition . tells her it was a proposal . When asks what had happened to 's first two marriages , he tells her his wives had left him because he led too dull a life . The two thugs keep coming at them from two sides , and they all continue climbing down . As and come around an outcropping , they are surprised by waiting with a drawn knife . He pounces on , and the two of them tussle until manages to kick him away . Valerian plunges to his death . In the meantime , has caught up with and is trying to wrest the figurine out of her hands . He gets the statuette away , and pushes her over a ledge . She falls a few feet and manages to grab onto another ledge with her fingertips . comes to help her . He reaches her and takes hold of her wrist , but he ca n't pull her up . comes to the ledge just above him . pleads with to help them . Instead of helping , steps on 's fingers . Just then a shot rings out . drops the figure which shatters , revealing the hidden microfilm . He falls into the depths , already dead . On the summit , the and the captive stand with a group of park rangers . One of the rangers puts away his gun . Now the only way for to save is to pull her up on his own . As he finally succeeds in lifting her up , the scene changes to a compartment , and is lifting his bride into the upper berth . The honeymooners embrace as the train enters a tunnel.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > , meaning " to live " , is the story of a top Japanese bureaucrat coming to terms with his impending death , and of his work to create a positive , lasting effect on a community . The story opens with an image of an X - ray . A voiceover informs the audience that unbeknownst to him , ( ) has terminal stomach cancer . , of , is hard at work stamping papers and overseeing his employees when the 's approaches the division for help . Their goal is to have a cesspool in their community replaced by a park where their children can safely play . ( ) receives their request and asks for advice . Without a second 's hesitation , instructs him to send them to that day , a burst of girlish laughter rings out in the silent room when the only female staffer , ( ) , reads a joke about how the bureaucracy is merely wasting their time in busywork . - ( ) , full of self - righteousness , asks how she dares to laugh in the middle of a workday . Toyo explains that she has just read a funny joke . They make her read it to them ; however , they do not find it amusing . The voiceover continues that has already " been dead for twenty years . " reaches in his drawer for paper to use to clean his stamp , removing the top sheet . The audience sees that it is a title page of a report that he did recommending how to improve efficiency twenty years sends the 's on to another division , beginning endless rounds of the bureaucracy . They finally arrive at the office of the ( ) where he , after using political speak to promise them nothing , sends them back to where they first began . The 's returns to ; however , has taken the day off to visit a physician . , not remembering them , again directs them to . In frustration after facing rejection yet again , the women loudly complain as they turn to leave . Chastened , an apologetic follows them , recommending that they file a written is in the waiting room at the medical center when the name of a patient rings out over the loudspeaker . A man moves closer to confide in that the man who just left is dying of stomach cancer . He tells the symptoms , which terrify because they resemble his own . The man explains that the physicians here do not tell their patients the truth , and he tells what they will say instead if you are dying of cancer . Visibly shaken , listens as the man states that if they say it is only an ulcer , no need for surgery , and eat whatever you like , you have less than a year to live . He continues , once you start vomiting , you have only three months left . When finally gets to see the doctor , the physician gives him the diagnosis of an ulcer , explains that there is no need for surgery , and tells to eat whatever he would like . drops his coat in horror , remembering the man 's words . As the nurse picks up his coat , begs the doctor to be honest with him and to admit that he has cancer . The doctor instead denies an honest diagnosis . Dejectedly , lowers his head to the is a widower with a son he has raised alone since boyhood . adores his beloved son ( ) and rushes home to both tell and to derive comfort from him . is not home , so a shaken huddles on the floor in the dark , waiting for the son he adores . Unaware that he is waiting there in the dark , and his wife ( ) walk into the room carrying on a conversation about how they can not wait to inherit 's money . In despair , listens as they discuss how they want access to his money now so that they can finally buy a home of their own . When turns on the light , they see a heartbroken . In tears , runs downstairs to his own room , his faith in , the employees send a staffer to 's home because , after 30 years of perfect attendance , has not shown up for work or even called in sick for five days . Shocked , calls her husband to tell an equally perplexed that even though has been leaving faithfully every single day , he has not gone to work . is passing his days in a bar , drinking to forget his troubles . A writer at the bar befriends , and after learning that is dying , invites him for an evening of " enjoying life . " They go to a red - light district where a drunken despairingly sings the theme song about how quickly life passes.\\nDetermined to resign from the bureaucracy , Toyo hunts for , finally running into him by happenstance on the street . After she explains that working in the bureaucracy is killing her soul , he agrees to stamp her resignation letter . She goes home with him so that he can get his stamp . His housekeeper ( ) witnesses Toyo grabbing his hands in excitement . As Toyo prepares to leave his home , asks if he might go with her ; she agrees . From their window , a surprised and witness and leaving together . convinces to spend the day with him , and they forge a decides to try again to tell about his terminal cancer . , however , misunderstands about 's relationship with . Before can confide in him , a furious demands protect his inheritance from . This incident , combined with the conversation he previously overheard , leads to believe that his son cares more about his money than about him.\\nToyo 's hectic new position in industry leaves her stressed ; however , does not see this . He continues to spend time with her searching for insight into how she manages to be so full of life . Toyo explains that she finds fulfillment by making toy rabbits for the children of . has a revelation , and he leaves hopeful ; however , despairingly realizes that she is the one not truly living . , remembering the cesspool , decides to create a lasting effect in Kuroe.\\nFive months after his visit to the medical center , dies . At his funeral , the 's pays its respects , sobbing in grief . A police officer shares that he saw swinging in the park the night he died , joyfully singing . In flashbacks , we see visiting to assess ; working tenaciously to overcome every barrier ; and chuckling when the threaten his life , the life of a dying man , due to his interference in their plan to turn into a red - light district . As the bureaucratic staffers reminisce , they finally credit with building the park . This leads the staffers to drunkenly vow to follow 's example.\\nA group of citizens approach for help , however , when asks newly appointed for advice , he directs them to another division . jumps to his feet reproachfully , wanting to remind of the vow made at 's funeral . stares aggressively at until he rights his chair and sinks down at his desk , buried under a mound of paperwork . Weighed down with despair , stops on the bridge over as he makes his way home . He pays his respects to as he watches the children of happily playing in their new park . He remembers how overcame barriers to build this safe place for the children of to grow and thrive . As he walks on , the viewer has the honor of determining whether he will give in to pressure , or if he will instead strive to overcome barriers , following 's example , and help an oppressed group.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > A woman 's face gives way to a kaleidoscope of credits , signaling the start of 's to 's haunting score . A criminal climbs up the rungs of the ladder to the rooftop on a dark night . " " ( ) , a detective , and a police officer are hot on his trail . They chase him across the top of buildings . The thief jumps between two buildings , making it across . The police officer follows , but ca n't get his footing . He slips . hangs on to the gutter as his fear of heights kicks in . The police officer tries to help him and asks for his his hand , but the officer slips and falls to his death . Scottie witnesses this as he clutches the gutter . Months after the incident , reclines in the home of " " ( ) , a painter and fashion illustrator . She is concerned about 's plans now that he is back in shape . He has retired from the police force due to his acrophobia , and does not want to be a desk jockey . and used to be engaged back in college , but it was broken off . blithely waves their engagement off as a flight of fancy , ended by , but it 's clear from 's expression that was more likely the unwilling party and that still holds a torch for him . She urges him to take a vacation . " Do n't be so motherly " , responds . They discuss an old college buddy , ( ) , who wants to meet with . Scottie attempts to gradually get over his fear of heights by using a step stool . He is able to handle the first two steps , but when he reaches the top , he looks out the window down into the street below and panics . He collapses in 's meets , who is in the shipping business . married into the business , and he wants to tail his wife . He does not suspect infidelity , but hints that his wife has been possessed by something . She 's become distant and distracted and has taken to roaming the city and surrounding area . The no - nonsense initially dismisses the supernatural undertones of 's worries , but is nevertheless intrigued . invites to observe him and his wife at 's the following night . 's is a lavish , upscale eatery , plush and scarlet . Scottie first spots ( ) who is stunning , with platinum blonde hair , a black dress and a green shawl . He is mesmerized by her . The next morning , he stalks her outside her house . She wears a simple gray suit with white gloves , as she gets into her green automobile . follows her through the streets of , as she visits a flower shop and purchases a small bouquet . He then trails her to the , where she goes through the chapel to the cemetery , finally stopping to stand at a grave . As she exits , notes the headstone , which reads " born : 3 1831 died : 5 1857 . " He then tracks her to the of the of , an art museum . sits , staring at a portrait for hours . notices that the bouquet she purchased is just like the one in the painting . Also , her hair is done exactly like the woman in the painting . discovers from the curator that the painting is titled " of " and he is given a catalog of the paintings . Finally , he follows her to the , where observes in a second story window . enters the old hotel and asks the manager ( ) , who the occupant of the room is . She hesitates to tell him , until reveals his badge . The manager reveals that the woman 's name is , but that has not been in the room all day . finds this impossible , and goes up to the room , which is indeed empty . He looks down the street to discover that her car is gone . Scottie returns to 's home where he asks her for a local historian expert . She tells him of historian ( ) , who owns the . She and pay Pop a visit and asks the man about the hotel . Pop tells that the hotel was originally a house built by a rich man for his mistress , , and they had a child . However , the rich man eventually discarded , keeping their child to raise with his childless wife . went from depressed to insane , and finally took her own life . On the drive home , and talk about the portrait ; he shows her the catalog picture . The resemblance is uncanny . Another conversation with reveals that had started to wear 's jewelry , particularly a ruby pendant shown in the painting . 's great - grandmother was , a fact that does not know . only knows this fact because 's mother told him . follows the next day to the of the , where she gazes at the portrait . Then he follows her to near the . strolls by the shore , throwing petals into the bay , until without warning , she jumps in . dives after her . She is alive but unconscious , and he takes her back to his apartment . wakes up at 's apartment , perplexed and alarmed to find herself naked in a strange man 's bed . hands her a red bathrobe and explains that he rescued her from drowning . maintains that she must have fainted and fallen . He questions her , " Has this ever happened to you before ? " calls , concerned about the whereabouts of his wife . reassures him that is at his apartment . informs that is twenty - six - the same age at which committed suicide . hears the door close , and realizes that has left . As drives away from 's house , arrives just in time to have a misunderstanding . She believes that and are in a relationship . The next morning , trails through the streets of , only to find that has been looking for 's house . catches her leaving a thank you letter for saving her . She did not know the address , but followed the . , now smitten with , insists that they wander together , because they are both alone . They arrive at , where they admire the ancient redwoods . As they view a cross - section of a tree with the approximate dates of historical events , goes into a trance , seemingly becoming , recounting the dates of her birth and death . wanders deeper into the woods , and follows her . He confronts her about her jump into the bay , and tries to bring back . By the shore , begins to reveal fragments of her vague memories : an empty grave with no name , waiting for her ; an empty room in which she sits alone ; and finally a tower , , and garden in . admits she is not crazy ; she does not want to die . They drive to the beach and kiss as the waves crash onto the rocks . promises he will never leave her . arrives at 's place upon having received a note from inquiring as to his whereabouts . mischievously reveals a new picture she 's been painting-- a portrait of herself as . is not amused by the gag . , he leaves immediately . Midge ruins the painting , upset by the depth of his feeling for and her own misguided attempt to make light of it , which has distanced them further . returns to 's house , where she tells him of an awful dream , with a tower , a bell , and a village . As she describes the location in detail , finishes her descriptions . " You 've been there ! " he exclaims . is talking about the , a mission that has been converted into a museum . They drive to the mission . When they arrive at the mission , they enter the livery stable , where tries to dismiss the dreams logically . He points out certain objects that are real . They kiss . explains she must do something . She asks him if he believes she loves him . He replies yes . " And if you lose me , then you 'll know I , I loved you . And I wanted to go on loving you , '' she says . She starts to go to the church , when realizes she is going to the bell tower . chases her into the chapel , and sees her run up the stairs . He follows her , but as he looks down , his vertigo sets in , paralyzing him . He can not follow her up to the top of the bell tower . He watches , helpless , in fear and horror as 's body plunges to the tiles below . staggers out of the mission , sun blinding his eyes , dumbfounded . At the a judicial hearing concerning 's death , the judge is particularly cruel to ; he insults him for letting his weakness get in the way of saving . The court rules the incident a suicide . comforts , while telling him that , with the loss of his wife , he can no longer stay in . sets off for . has trouble sleeping . Blue and purple flashes signal his nightmare , as an animated bouquet unravels . He dreams of seeing at the hearing , with special emphasis on the ruby necklace . walks into the cemetery where there is an open grave . falls into the grave , which has become precipitous , then his body lands next to 's on the tiles of the mission . He wakes up in a cold sweat . Midge arrives to care for in a psychiatric ward . She tries to comfort him , " mother 's here . " will not speak , he is in a daze . The doctor believes that will be incapacitated for a year due to stress and anxiety from his depression and guilt . Several months later , upon his eventual release from the hospital , remains in the grip of an obsession . He visits the old home , and spots the green car . In the distance , a woman in gray suit is getting in it . Unfortunately for him , it is not ; it is an older neighbor who bought the car from . At 's he spots a woman in a green evening dress , but again , it is not . He even sees at the of the , but once again , it is not her . While looking at a bouquet at a flower shop , he sees a striking brunette in a green dress who resembles . He follows her to the , and sees her through the fifth floor window . When knocks on the door , the woman is concerned that he is a creep . He reassures her he just wants to talk . He interrogates her rather aggressively , and she shows him proof that she is from , . realizes that 's heart is broken for his former flame , and she takes pity on him . She agrees to go for dinner with him later at . After leaves , flashbacks reveal 's memories . She was , running up the steps of the bell tower . At the top , was there , holding the body of the real , dressed in exactly the same outfit as . It was the real 's body that was thrown off the bell tower , with letting out the scream . even keeps the gray suit that she wore as hidden in the back of her closet . She begins to write a letter to , explaining that she was 's accomplice in the murder of his wife . She had pretended to be to fool , and use him as a witness to lend credence to the idea that was mentally unstable . had known about his vertigo , and knew that would never make it to the top of the bell tower . reconsiders this letter , and tears it up , deciding she wants to be with rather than run away . That night , mistakes another patron for at 's . He escorts home , her apartment flooded with the green neon light of the sign . He 's overwhelmed by his yearning for , a woman lost to him , although through he is able to capture the ghost of 's presence . They agree to meet the next morning and go out with having to make some excuse to her employer . They engage in a series of dates , with becoming happier with the relationship . However , little by little , he begins to make over in the image of . He searches obsessively for the gray suit and white gloves that used to wear and even convinces to bleach her hair . Although begs him to love her for herself , she is so in love with that she allows him to change her into . After undergoing an extensive makeover , returns to an anxiously awaiting . wo n't brook the slightest deviation from his recreation of , and insists that her now platinum blonde hair up exactly the way wore hers , which she does , completing the transformation . In a dreamlike state , with the green glow all around them , they embrace and kiss . The room turns into the livery stable from the , 's last kiss with , and then back to the apartment . has finally managed to turn back time and resurrect from the dead . A couple of nights later , the two decide to go out to 's . dresses up , and puts on the same ruby pendant depicted in the portrait of . realizes that something is amiss . He suddenly becomes distant . He suggests they not go to 's and go south down the coast and continues driving past the redwood forest . He tells her he has one final thing to do . is torn between her love for and the fear and guilt she feels over having colluded with . They arrive at the mission , where forces to re - enact 's last moments ; their final kiss , 's parting words . He relentlessly pushes up the stairs of the mission tower , discovering in the process that his vertigo is not as limiting as it was . He reveals to that her putting on the necklace that belonged to is what gave her away . As he reaches the top of the bell tower , he puts the whole puzzle together . He finally realizes that was the counterfeit all along . He never knew the real . He was being set up as 's witness in the murder of 's wife . He pulls to the top of the tower , where she protests . pleads that she has fallen in love with . They kiss . The sudden appearance of a women in the shadows , however , startles , who steps backwards and plummets to her death off the ledge . A nun steps into the light and in the final shot , as the nun tolls the death bell , a devastated stands frozen in despair , having now lost the same woman twice , and this time ... forever.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) is a lonely office drone for an insurance company in . Four different company managers take turns commandeering 's apartment , which is located on 67th on the , for their various extramarital liaisons . Unhappy with the situation , but unwilling to challenge them directly , he juggles their conflicting demands while hoping to catch the eye of fetching elevator operator ( ) . Meanwhile the neighbors in the apartment building assume is a " good time " who brings home a different drunken woman every night . accepts their criticism rather than reveal the truth . The four managers write glowing reports about a little too glowing , so personnel director ( ) suspects something illicit behind the praise . Sheldrake lets 's promotion go unchallenged on condition that he be allowed to use the apartment as well , starting that night . Sheldrake gives two tickets to The to ensure his absence . Delighted about his promotion , asks to meet him at the theatre . She agrees and it is revealed to the audience that she is 's girlfriend , intending to break off their affair that night but is instead charmed by to the apartment . is disappointed at being stood up , but is willing to forgive . At an office party on , discovers the relationship between and , though he conceals this realization , while learns from 's secretary that she is merely the latest female employee to be his mistress , the secretary herself having filled that role several years earlier . At the apartment , confronts Sheldrake with this information and while he maintains that he genuinely loves her , he leaves to return to his family . Meanwhile , a depressed picks up a woman in a local bar and , upon returning the apartment , is astounded to find in his bed , fully clothed and overdosed on 's sleeping pills . sends his bar pickup home and enlists the help of his neighbour , a physician , in reviving without notifying the authorities . The doctor makes various assumptions about and , which concedes without revealing 's involvement . later telephones Sheldrake and informs him of the situation , and while Sheldrake professes gratitude for 's quiet handling of the matter , he avoids any further involvement . recuperates in 's apartment under his care for two days , during which he tries to entertain and distract her from any possible suicidal afterthoughts , talking her into playing numerous hands of gin rummy , though she is largely uninterested . and 's absence from work is noted and commented on , with 's former " customers " assuming that and were having an affair . 's taxi - driver brother - in - law comes looking for her and two of the customers cheerfully direct him to 's apartment , partly out of spite since he has been denying them access since his arrangement with . The brother - in - law also assumes the worst of and punches him several times . , angered at his secretary for sharing the truth with , fires her . She retaliates by telling his wife about his infidelities , leading to the breakup of the marriage . Sheldrake moves into a room at his athletic club and continues to string along while he enjoys his newfound bachelorhood . finally takes a stand when Sheldrake demands the apartment for another liaison with on 's , which results in quitting the firm . When hears of this from , she realizes that is the man who truly loves her and abandons him , running to the apartment . , in the midst of packing to move out , is bewildered by her appearance and her insistence on resuming their earlier game of rummy . When he declares his love for her , her reply is the now - famous final line of the movie : " Shut up and deal . "</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) is the only child of and ; a doctor and a schoolteacher , respectively . ( ) is a stoic and distant father , and never makes physical contact with his daughter except for a monthly medical checkup . When is six , he concludes that she has a serious heart defect ( when in reality , 's heart beats faster due to nervousness from her father 's rare contact ) . He declares to be too delicate for school , and she is taught at home by her mother . ( ) is constantly stressed and anxious , and breaks down over strange and minor events such as 's goldfish leaping from its bowl . Given no mental stimulation from her parents and isolated from other children , develops an intricate imagination to entertain herself . She becomes fairly comfortable in her solitude , but her life is shaken when her mother is inadvertently fatally crushed by a suicidal tourist leaping from the roof of . Her father becomes deeply depressed , and receives even less parental affection . In her late teens , she moves to her own apartment and takes a job as a caf waitress in . amuses herself with life 's simple , everyday pleasures , since her romantic relationships were often disappointing . She takes interest in the lives of others , but does not get involved . Residents of her apartment building include ( ) , an elderly reclusive artist with very brittle bones ; ( ) , the sulking concierge who mourns the death of her cheating husband ; ( ) , the grouchy grocer ; and ( ) , 's clumsy employee . On 31 , 1997 , as she watches a news report of 's death , chance leads to discover a small box behind a wall in her bathroom . It contains pictures , toys , and mementos from decades before . decides to find the box 's owner to return it , and if he is touched by the gesture , she will dedicate her life to such acts of kindness . After consulting 's parents , who had lived in her apartment building around the time the box was hidden ( roughly 1950 ) , receives a possible name for the owner : . looks up several in the city , but to no avail . Her neighbor provides her with the correct spelling- and is able to track him down . She slyly returns the box to him , and the aging ( ) is brought to tears by his childhood memories . After anonymously trailing him to a bar , learns that her act had inspired him to visit his estranged daughter and finally meet his grandson . is delighted . decides to encourage her aging and morose father to travel for the first time . She steals his beloved garden gnome and gives it to her stewardess friend , who takes pictures of it in famous foreign locations at her flight stops . anonymously sends the pictures to her father , hoping to inspire wanderlust . One day at the train station , encounters ( ) , an eccentric young man whose hobby is reconstructing torn - up pictures found underneath photo booths . drops one of his photo albums when chasing a mysterious man through the station , and looks through it . The man was chasing appears in multiple reconstructed photos throughout the album , and is intent on discovering his identity . Nino himself had an isolating childhood , much like , and the two grew up only a few miles apart , longing for friends but never meeting . decides to return the album , but is interested in meeting . After visiting the pornography shop where he works as a clerk , she learns he has another job at a carnival . She sets up a series of clues for him that would eventually bring them together . Meanwhile ( ) , a co - worker at the cafe , is plagued by her - , ( ) , who jealously spies on her all day and mutters notes into a tape recorder . Amelie attempts to remedy this by setting him up with another co - worker , the hypochondriac ( ) . Meanwhile , her cat - and - mouse games with have captured his attention , and he wants to meet her as well . In the meantime , steals 's letters from her husband ( written to her decades before ) and cleverly creates a new letter in which he apologizes to his wife for his infidelity . After receiving the false letter , is overjoyed with the news that her husband loved her after all . also avenges by playing practical jokes on ( whom she dislikes for constantly insulting ) . has regular visits with , who has been recreating the same painting for 20 years . He reminds her that , despite her intentions to help others , she is neglecting her own pursuit for happiness . Amelie resolves to meet once and for all , and lures him to her caf with a note . He arrives but she is too shy to address him , even when he gently confronts her with the note . While is out of earshot , her fellow waitress asks to talk with her in private , to ensure that will not be hurt by him . After speaking with , sees that he is a good man . However , 's ex - boyfriend sees the two leave together and , after being dumped by , reveals his ( incorrect ) observation that and are dating . hears this , and is crushed . At home , weeps while frustratingly baking a cake . She daydreams of a life with , amid all the current characters in her life . She is startled when her doorbell rings . She hears speaking to her from the hallway , but she is too nervous to answer . Assuming she is not home , slips a note under her door , assuring her that he will return . A conflicted finds a personal videotape from , in which he encourages her to pursue the man she loves , or risk eternal unhappiness . rushes to the door just as returns . She brings him in without speaking , and after finally seeing each other under new circumstances , they begin a relationship . Some time later , and are still happy together . A narrator encourages the audience to observe the miraculous details of life that occur every moment.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis>"A bit of the old ultra - violence . "The story takes place in in a dystopian future . " Our humble narrator " ( ) and his droogs , ( ) , ( ) , and ( ) , are seated in the stoned on milk laced with narcotics . Shortly , the gang leaves the for a night of ultra - violence . They encounter a wino ( ) in an underpass , and beat him with their truncheons . Later , they arrive at a derelict theater . On the stage , another gang , led by a rival named , prepare to rape a voluptuous girl . Instead , the two gangs battle it out-- and his two droogs are victorious . The trio next head out into the dark countryside looking for action . pilots their stolen 95 sports car . After playing " hogs of the road , " wherein they drive on the wrong side of the road and run a number of other motorists off into ditches and over embankments , suggests making a " surprise visit . " They stop at a lonely country house that displays a backlighted sign that simply reads " Home . " tricks his way into the house by claiming to be the victim of a car accident . They beat the homeowner , a writer named ( ) , and gang rape his wife ( ) while croons " ' in the . "When they 've finished having fun , the gang returns to the . An opera singer seated at an adjacent table sings the chorus from 's 9th . Listening to the woman , is ecstatic -- " I felt all the malenky little hairs on my plott standing but Dim ruins the mood when he makes a farting noise . hits him in the crotch with his truncheon . Henceforth , is resentful but dismisses him . arrives at his apartment just before dawn . Climbing into bed , he fantasizes scenes of violence while listening to 's 9th . In the morning , 's mother ( ) tries to wake for school , but he feigns illness . At the breakfast table she discusses the situation with his father ( ) . 's parents seem foolish and impotent . When later awakens and wanders about the apartment in his underwear he encounters his probation officer , ( ) , in his parent 's bedroom . The officer lectures about his school truancy and threatens him with jail . After leaves , begins another busy day . He picks up two girls at a local shopping mall record store and brings them home . In a sped - up sequence backed by the " , " he has sex with both of them . Later that day , he encounters his droogs in his apartment house lobby . They ominously tell him that they 've been " talking . " They feel that has been bullying them , especially Dim , and they suggest that has been taking more than his fair share of the spoils from their robberies . Georgie proposes an idea to make lots more money . He wants to rob a rich lady who owns a health farm in the country . perceives 's independent thinking as a threat , but wanting to appear democratic , he goes along with it . As the three droogs walk along a river bank outside the apartment block , attacks . He throws first and then Dim into the fountain . When offers to help pull Dim out of the water , he slashes the back of Dim 's outstretched hand with a hidden dagger . They all retire to the of , a restaurant . Having re - established his dominance of the group , reconsiders 's idea . Arriving at the health farm that evening , the droogs try the same trick they 'd used at 's house previously : pretending that one of them has been injured in a traffic accident . However , the proprietress ( ) is suspicious and calls the police , telling them that she 'd heard the news reports about the writer and his wife being victimized in the same manner . When the boys are n't let into the house , climbs up a drainpipe , enters a second floor window , and confronts the homeowner . They fight , the woman defending herself with a bust of , until bludgeons her with a huge plastic phallus sculpture . As police sirens are heard in the distance , runs out the front door . It is there and then that his droogs take their revenge . Dim smashes in the face with a milk bottle and the droogs flee . As writhes and screams on the ground , the police arrive . is arrested . At the police station , an uncooperative and is questioned by several constables . When an overzealous beat constable presses his thumb against 's broken nose , kicks the officer in the groin . The other officers then beat until shows up . tells that unfortunately for him , the proprietress of the health farm has died , making a murderer . He spits in 's face and tells him how disappointed he is . laughs it off , but is soon headed for prison . gets sentenced to fourteen years in prison . He deposits his possessions with ( ) , undresses , and undergoes a cavity search . After answering several questions about his health and personal well - being , is given prison garb . He 's now prisoner number 655321.Two years later , is shown scheming to get favors by feigning piety . He helps the prison chaplain ( ) with his service and he studies the . But rather than reflecting on the redemptive power of the , visualizes himself torturing at the crucifixion , killing people in battle , and laying about with concubines in an setting . tells the chaplain that he 's heard of a new treatment , the so - called " , " that helps criminals get out of prison . The chaplain says that it 's experimental and that he 's not sure it 's right for . But , eager to finagle a short - cut to freedom , vies to be selected for the experiment . When the government 's ( ) visits the prison , makes a show of himself . The minister picks as a perfect subject . is taken before the prison governor ( ) who tells the boy that , although he 'd rather punish him , the political party currently in power have " new , ridiculous ideas " about criminal reform , so will shortly be released . The then transports to the . is given a room and is interviewed by ( ) . She promises him that he 'll be fine , then gives him an injection . In his first day of treatment appears in an auditorium in a straight jacket . His head is strapped to the back of a restraining chair so that he can neither turn his head nor look away . An eye doctor installs clamps on his eyelids that forcibly keep 's eyes open . Then , while the doctor constantly drops eye wash into 's grotesquely clamped eyes , is subjected to two violent films . The first shows explicit scenes of a severe beating , the second , a gang rape . Halfway through the first film begins to feel sick . By the end of the second , is shouting for something into which to vomit . At the rear of the auditorium , ( ) explains to observers that the drug administered to causes a form of paralysis with deep feelings of terror and helplessness . Following the screening , assures that his feeling of sickness is a sign that he 's getting better . On the following day is back in the auditorium , this time for two shows : morning and afternoon . While viewing scenes of during , begins screaming in earnest . The background music is none other than 's 9th . screams that he should n't be made to feel sick while listening to such beautiful music . loudly apologizes , saying that it ca n't be helped while quietly he speculates to nearby staff that perhaps this is the " punishment element . "Two weeks later , presumably after twelve more treatments , is paraded before a group of dignitaries by the . is there for demonstration purposes . He is first confronted by an angry ( ) who throws him to the ground and forces to lick his boot . Next he 's approached by a statuesque platinum blonde ( ) clad only in panties . collapses in a fit of nausea when he tries to touch her breasts . The proclaims a new era in law enforcement and social justice , but the prison chaplain exclaims that the procedure has debased 's human nature by taking away his ability to choose good over evil . The counter claims that the only thing that matters is results . Welcome returns home to find his parents plus a stranger ( ) sitting in the living room reading newspaper accounts of his release . tries to make awkward small talk . When he hints about moving back home , his father tells him that , their new lodger , has already paid the next month 's rent . is upset but , who has ingratiated himself with 's parents , pushes the situation by castigating for the things he did before going to prison and for breaking his parents ' hearts . Before can hit , his psychological conditioning kicks in , leaving him dry heaving , to the dismay and disgust of and 's parents . When he has recovered , storms out . Alex later stares at the river below a bridge , presumably contemplating suicide . He 's approached by a bum seeking spare change . fishes some cash from his pocket and hands it over . Taking a closer look , the bum recognizes as the same malchick who beat him under the bridge two years earlier . looks at the bum in horror and tries to escape , but is trapped in the very same underpass by the bum and his elderly compatriots . They hit and kick as he cowers on the ground , disabled by his conditioning . Two constables show up to break up the fight . To 's further horror , his rescuers turn out to be and , his former droogs , who are now constables . Demonstrating that police training has n't altered their basic violent natures , they , drive him out of town . Out in the woods , Dim pushes ' head into a cattle trough filled with filthy water , and beats him with his baton . They then remove the cuffs and leave him battered and gasping . With thoughts of home echoing in his head , staggers to the first house he can find . It displays a welcoming , backlighted sign that reads " Home . home , sits at his typewriter , now in the wheelchair that he 's used ever since he was severely beaten two years earlier . ( ) , his muscular attendant , answers the doorbell . As opens the door , collapses into the entryway . carries him into the house . When confronted by a concerned , realizes he 's at the very same residence in which , two years earlier , he and his former partners in crime gang - raped 's wife . He relaxes , however , when he realizes that could n't possibly recognize him due to the fact that and his droogies wore masks back in those days . , who knows only as the subject of the treatment , invites the lad to have a bath and some supper . As soaks in the bath , calls a friend with whom he discusses the political repercussions of 's conditioning . He believes that the government has a totalitarian agenda , as exemplified by its willingness to rob its citizens of their free will . As he finishes the conversation , arranges a visit with the person on the other end , stating , " He 'll be here , " before he hangs up the phone . sits in his wheelchair relishing a fantasy of using as a political pawn when he becomes aware of singing coming from the bathroom . In his bath , has struck up a bright rendition of " ' in the Rain . " 's face twists in agony and rage as he thinks back to the night of the home invasion that left him crippled and realizes just who is . Later , at the dinner table , an obviously distraught encourages to eat and drink . Flanked by the apoplectic and the burly , eats a plate of spaghetti while plies with red wine . As he eats , grows increasingly fearful , wondering if the hostile - looking old man knows his real identity . Suddenly brings up the subject of his wife 's rape and subsequent death . He believes that , though she officially died of pneumonia , it was her broken spirit that killed her . She was , according to , a victim of the modern age , just as is a victim of the modern age . He tells that two friends are expected and that they will help the boy . A minute later , man named ( ) and a woman ( ) enter . They question about the treatment and whether it is true that , in addition to conditioning him against sex and violence , it has also made him incapable of listening to music . replies that he only feels a foreboding sense of extreme depression when he hears 's at which point he passes out , face down , into the plate of spaghetti . He has been drugged by the wine . congratulates who then asks to bring the car around to the front . The conspirators have plans for that will embarrass the government . awakens the next morning in a small , second floor bedroom in an unknown country house . The room is flooded with the strains of 's 9th blasted from a stereo in the room below . As beams with satisfaction , is driven to suicide . He leaps from the second floor window to the stone patio below . time later , wakes up in a hospital in a full - body cast , having survived his suicide attempt . Newspaper clippings reveal that the government is being vilified for inhuman experimentation . The is being subjected to especially fierce attack . 's parents visit , apologizing for not taking him back and promising him his old room when he is released from the hospital . Next , is visited by ( ) , a psychiatrist . He tells her he had strange dreams of other scientists messing around in his head . She says she 's unable to interpret his dreams and then cheerfully shows a series of cartoons having sexual or violent connotations . is to supply the captions . He pleases by indicating through his descriptions of the cartoons that sex and violence are the foremost interests on his mind . Once the has been successfully reversed , the visits . As the aristocratic spoon - feeds dinner to the juvenile thug , he assures that he wants to be his friend . With oily smoothness the apologizes for what his government has done . He promises a good job on a good salary , provided that helps the government . He assures the lad that the subversive writer , , who had threatened him , has been put away . milks the meeting for all it 's worth . As a symbol of their understanding , the calls for his assistants . They sweep in with flowers and a massive stereo system blasting 's 9th , followed by a troop of reporters and photographers . Alex poses with his new friend , the , aka " , " as cameras flash and 's 9th reaches its choral climax . 's eyes roll back into his head as he fantasizes about an orgy in the snow with a gorgeous blonde , to the applause of Victorian ladies and gentlemen . is heard in voiceover : " I was cured , all right . "</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) is a successful insurance salesman for - Risk returning to his office building in downtown late one night . , clearly in pain , sits down at his desk and tells the whole story into a for his colleague ( ) , a claims adjuster . It is the story of how he meets the sultry ( ) during a routine house call to renew an automobile insurance policy for her husband . A flirtation develops , at least until hears wonder how she could take out a policy on her husband 's life without him knowing it . knows she means murder and wants no part of it . pursues to his own home , and persuades him that the two of them , together , should kill her husband . knows all the tricks of his trade and comes up with a plan in which 's husband will die an unlikely death , in this case being thrown from a train . - Risk will therefore be required , by the " double indemnity " clause in the insurance policy , to pay the widow twice the normal amount . , a tenacious investigator , does not suspect foul play at first , but eventually concludes that the woman and an unknown accomplice must be behind the husband 's death . He has no reason to be suspicious of , someone he has worked with for quite some time and admires . is not only worried about . The victim 's daughter , ( ) , comes to him convinced that her stepmother , is behind her father 's death because her mother also died under suspicious circumstances when she was her nurse . begins to care about what might happen to , both of whose parents have been murdered . It is for this reason wants her killed because she had suspected her of murdering her parents in the first place . Then he learns is seeing 's boyfriend , , behind his back . Trying to save himself and no longer caring about the money , believes the only way out is to make the police think and 's boyfriend did the murder , which is what now believes anyway . However , when and meet , she tells him she has been seeing 's boyfriend only to provoke him into killing the suspicious in a jealous rage . , now wholly disgusted , is about to kill when she shoots him first . is badly wounded but still standing and walks towards her , telling her to shoot again . does not shoot and he takes the gun from her . She says she never loved him or anyone else and had been using him all along , " until a minute ago , when I could n't fire that second shot . " coldly says he does not believe this new ploy . hugs him tightly but then pulls away and looks up at him , startled that he has not responded . says " , baby , " then shoots and kills her . Before leaving , he convinces to not go inside because was responsibile for trying to break up him and . convinces him that she still loves him and she 's waiting for him to call her . reluctantly agrees to call and takes his quarter . Neff drives to his office where he dictates his full confession to , who arrives and hears enough of the confession to understand everything . tells he is going to rather than face a death sentence but collapses to the floor before he can reach the elevator.[edit ] Alternate endingWilder shot an alternate ending to the film ( to appease censors ) , featuring paying for his crime by going to the gas chamber . This footage is lost , but stills of the scene still exist.source : Wikipedia</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The story opens in the late 1960s at , , the , where a group of young recruits , after having their heads shaved , are being prepped for basic training by the brutal ( ) , whose orders are to " weed out all non - hackers " . gives each of the nicknames ; one pragmatic recruit who talks behind his back becomes " " ( ) ; a recruit becomes " " ( ) . And finally , a 6 - foot 3 - inch , 280 pound , slow - witted recruit with low intelligence and ambition becomes " " ( ) , and the focus of 's brutality , because the overweight recruit can not keep up with the other more physically fit recruits in the grueling obstacle courses . leads the recruits through endless running , marching and rifle drills . When mixes up right from left , slaps him viciously and makes him walk behind the platoon with his pants around his ankles while sucking his thumb after he cries from the constant verbal and physically abuse . On the obstacle course , ca n't perform pull - ups or climb to the top of one of the higher obstacles , receiving more torrents of verbal abuse from . One morning during muster , asks if he believes in the . responds that he does n't , angering the Catholic drill instructor . The clearly religious gives a vicious backhanded slap and orders to change his answer . stubbornly refuses , stating that he believes that will only " beat him harder if he reverses himself . " immediately promotes to squad leader for having the courage to stand up for himself . However , also gives the difficult job of being 's personal instructor . Off on the sidelines over the next few days , helps through the obstacle courses , shows him how to operate and clean his rifle and how to make his bed . However , all of 's effort is later proven to be a waste . During a routine evening inspection , , noticing that 's foot locker is unlocked , searches it and finds a jelly doughnut ; food is strictly forbidden in the barracks and is not permitted to eat donuts because he 's overweight . , decides that from then on instead of punishing for each transgression , he 'll punish all the other recruits in the platoon . A few nights later , the angry recruits attack with soap bars wrapped in towels while gags him and a few others hold him down on his bed with a blanket . At first , is reluctant to attack , but after persuades him , hits longer and harder than most of the others . In his bunk , covers his ears , ashamed at himself for his actions , while howls in pain . After the traumatic experience , slowly begins to go insane but also shapes up and becomes the fastest and best rifleman , especially after lectures the platoon on how and were both crack riflemen trained in the . is impressed with 's shooting skill and his marked improvement in training . Later , when sees talking to his rifle and staring off into space blankly , and not responding to interaction , he realizes that is losing his mind ( " Section 8 " ) , and confides in about 's growing mental breakdown . By the end of basic training , clearly has been completely dehumanized by its rigors . After graduation assigns each recruit a ( ) , most of them as 0300 ( ) . One exception is who is assigned as a 4212 ( ) . On the platoon 's last night on , draws fire watch ( guard patrol ) , during which he discovers in the bathroom loading his M-14 rifle with live ammunition . Frightened , attempts to calm the insane , who begins blankly shouting , executing drill commands and reciting the 's . The noise awakens , who angrily confronts and quietly demands that he drop the rifle . When refuses and does not respond , hurls further insults at him . responds by shooting , and then aims the rifle at . pleads with , who lowers the rifle and nods , possibly in recognition of as a friend . sits down on a toilet , places the muzzle of the weapon in his mouth and pulls the trigger , killing himself . One year later , is in , reporting on the for the military newspaper and . He and his partner , combat photographer ( ) , meet a prostitute ( ) in the streets and encounter a thief ( ) who steals 's camera . Walking back to their base , remarks how military forces are there to help the but they frequently take advantage of them . He also wants to join in the field and get a good story . tells him he wo n't take him along for fear of being killed . They return to their base for a press meeting with their commanding officer , ( ) , who reviews their latest news offerings and gives some of his corps new assignments and shares new directives about reporting standards . , however , wants to go to the front lines to get a good story . also remarks that there 's a lot of talk about the holiday ceasefire and how it may be broken by enemy forces . Lockhart scoffs at the idea , saying that the will simply go about their usual celebration of the holiday . That evening in the barracks , talks with the others GIs about wanting to go into combat , as claims he has done . One of the other mocks , saying he knows has never been in combat because he does n't have the " thousand - yard stare . " The sound of nearby artillery fire interrupts their argument . The are attacking and attempting to overrun the base in what turns out to be the beginning of the . 's unit returns fire but the base is not attacked as heavily as other locations . The next day , the staff learns about enemy attacks throughout . After cracks wise about - 's impending ( but likely canceled ) visit to the GIs , sends to , a forward operating - base near the ancient Vietnamese city of , to cover the combat taking place in the area . accompanies him , hoping to get some combat experience . During the helicopter ride , and encounter an insane door gunner who shoots indiscriminately at unarmed Vietnamese civilians on the ground , boasting about his ability to kill . When they land outside , and meet and talk to a lieutenant , ( ) . He tells , who is looking for his old friend , that he 's 's commanding officer . However , before and meet the squad , they follow up a rumor about Vietnamese civilians who are reported to have been executed by the . They go to the mass grave and find over 20 bodies in a mass grave that have been covered with lime . Joker talks to a lieutenant who confirms that the deceased were told by the they 'd be " re - educated " at a public meeting and were massacred when they arrived . As they wrap up their coverage , is approached and lectured by a belligerent colonel ( ) who demands to know why wears a peace symbol on his body armor when he also has the words ' Born to Kill ' written on his helmet . suggests it has to do with the " duality of " according to . The cynical colonel does n't believe him and tells him to " get with the program" . They later meet 's unit , the , and is finally reunited with , who has been promoted to sergeant and is second - in - command . accompanies the squad during the of . As they approach under tank cover , several mortar rounds land in front of them , killing . Another nicknamed ( ) takes command of the squad . The group goes into battle and quickly comes under enemy fire from a nearby building . Afterward , the squad is interviewed by a touring combat news team , and they share their experiences and opinion of the war . A little while later a South Vietnamese soldier and pimp ( ) with a prostitute ( ) visit the resting to offer her services to them . A few days later , the squad goes out on patrol again , this time in the factory - ruins north of the which divides the city of , where the believe enemy forces have hidden themselves . comes across a toy rabbit in a ruined building and picks it up , triggering an explosive booby trap that kills him , leaving as the squad leader . The squad becomes lost in more ruined buildings , and a unseen sniper ( ) pins them down wounding two of their comrades , first ( ) , and then ( ) when he tries to drag to safety . The sniper refrains from killing the wounded men , with the apparent intention to draw more of the squad into range . , unable to get tank support for the squad , orders everyone to pull out and leave and behind . The machine gunner , ( ) disregards 's orders to withdraw , charges into the clump of warehouse buildings , and locates the sniper . As the squad maneuvers to try to locate the sniper 's position , is shot through a hole in one of the buildings . He is rushed behind one of the blown - out buildings where the squad tries to keep him alive ; they fail and dies in 's arms . assumes command of the remaining and angrily declares , " Let 's go get some payback . " Using smoke grenades to conceal their advance , the squad enters the building and searches for the sniper . finds the sniper on an upper floor , but his rifle jams as he tries to shoot . The enemy sniper , a teenage girl , spins around , opening fire with her automatic rifle , pinning him behind a column . Panicked , drops his rifle and draws his sidearm , however he is unable to shoot back . arrives and shoots the sniper , saving . As and other of the squad converge , the sniper , still alive , begins to pray in her native language , then repeatedly begs ( in ) " shoot me " , prompting an argument about whether to leave her to die from her wounds or to put her out of her misery . decides to allow a mercy killing only if performs it . After some hesitation , shoots her with his sidearm . The sarcastically congratulate him on his first kill as stares into the distance , having finally gotten his dehumanized " thousand yard stare" . The film concludes with a night time shot of , , , and all the rest of the platoon marching through the burning ruins of toward their bivouac for the night , singing the ' ' . states that despite being " in a world of shit " , he is glad to be alive , and is no longer afraid.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > In 1980 , a Cuban man named ( ) claims asylum , in , , and is in search of the " " after departing in the boat - lift of 1980 . When questioned by three tough - talking officials , they notice a tattoo on 's left hand of a black heart with a pitchfork through it , which identifies him as a hit - man , and detain him in a camp called ' ' with other , including 's best friend and former buddy " " ( ) , under the local expressway while the government evaluates their visa petitions . After 30 days of governmental dithering and camp rumors , receives an offer from the which he quickly relays to . If they kill ( ) a former aide to who is now detained in , they will receive green cards . agrees , and kills during a riot at . The murder of was requested by , a wealthy , politically astute man who deals cars and trades in cocaine , as had tortured 's brother to death while still in many years earlier . After getting their , and find work as dishwashers in a corner sandwich / shop . Some weeks later , a henchman and under - boss , ( ) , the man who contacted for the hit job , offers and a low - risk job of unloading from a boat from to arrive in the following night for $ 500 each . insults by turning down the job over the little money they will receive , and demands at least $ 1,000 for the work . After an altercation , sets up on another job to purchase two kilograms of cocaine worth around $ 25,000 a piece from a Colombian dealer , named The , a medium to high - risk job for which and will receive $ 5,000 for their work . That weekend , , , and two other in his crew whom they met in , ( ) , and ( ) then set out to meet " the " ( ) at a seedy motel on the boulevard in . While and wait in the car on the street , and go up to the hotel room to meet with . The meeting does not go smoothly , as grows irritated with , who is slow to give him the cocaine in exchange for money . Suddenly , and are double - crossed by the . It becomes apparent that does not intend to sell the cocaine he has ; he only wants to steal the money has been given to purchase the product . To convince to give over the cash , dismembers in a shower stall with a chainsaw . After is dead , , about to suffer the same fate , is saved by and who arrive in the nick of time to gun down 's henchmen . receives a minor bullet wound in his shoulder when his sub - machine gun jams . Hector escapes but vengefully confronts him in the street and shoots him dead in the middle of the crowded ( the now famous boulevard ) . and his crew then get away with both the cocaine and the money before the police arrive . The following night , and meet ( ) at his house for the first time where impresses with not only the return of his cash but with a gift of the cocaine , a prize from the botched rip off . immediately hires and his crew into his criminal hierarchy , a representative of a Cuban mafia . But during this initial get together also meets 's lady , the blond and beautiful ( ) , who will eventually become the source of tension between the two men . Taking and out to a local nightclub , called The where frequently attends , and see first - hand the high standard of living they have come to acquire . Though actually warns against these excesses , is seduced by them regardless . Thus , begins his rise through the ranks of the cocaine underworld . After three months , has advanced in the ranks in 's cartel from drug runner and purchaser to a trusted lieutenant along with . They work low - risk jobs such as being 's bodyguards and messengers . continues to grow more attracted to as he helps her purchase a new vehicle for herself and casually flirts with her privately . enjoys the attention but still seems to think of as a low - level hood . attempts to make amends by meeting with his estranged family . It is implied that 's father , a former sailor , abandoned the family when was little . Since then , his mother ( ) and younger 19 - year - old sister ( ) have been living in . shows up at his mother 's and 's house one evening , fashionably dressed , and offers them $ 1,000 in cash for financial support . is overjoyed to see her older brother whom they have not seen for five years . However , 's mother has only scorn for him since he turned his back on them many years ago for the quick and easy life of crime back in , and wants nothing to do with him . She is too full of pride to accept his money despite being financially stricken . But , who idolizes her brother , follows him outside where he slips her the money secretly . tells that she wants in on the flashy life that he has going for him . 's love for is clearly genuine for she 's the only person that he trusts , and is also obsessively protective of her . Afterward , ( who waited in the car that he and arrived in ) makes a comment to about how attractive is , but angrily warns him to stay away from her . Several months later , is sent to to help set up a new distribution deal with Bolivian kingpin ( ) for the purchase of 200 kilograms of cocaine , since is having legal troubles that preclude him from leaving the country . Though was supposed to let do all the talking , proves to be a poor negotiator , prompting to step in and save the deal . They seem to negotiate a deal that , on the surface seems favorable to both sides , with overseeing the transportation to and to let and the cartel take over from there , but insists that would not approve . seemingly sides with and suggests that use his phone to call . A few minutes later , hands binoculars , and he sees two menacing assassins , the ( ) and the ( ) , execute by hanging him by the neck from an airborne helicopter . reveals that recognized as once being an informant for the police several years ago when he worked in ... and has a zero tolerance for disloyalty . insists that he never goes back on his word , and that he never trusted . Believing that is trustworthy , agrees to bring on board with him as his North American distributor of cocaine and other drugs . But upon their agreement , sternly warns never to betray or double - cross him in any way . Upon his return to , is verbally chewed out by for overstepping his authority as well as hearing about 's death . explains to that for a price of $ 18 million to pay for the manufacturing and transportation costs , they will receive 2,000 kilograms of cocaine from for nationwide sale and distribution which will earn them $ 75 million over a period of one year . is worried because he does not have the many millions to pay for the cocaine , but says that he is in tight with and he has established a " credit line " with him as well as work out a payment plan where they will pay $ 5 million up front and the rest in monthly installments . Plus , in case comes up short a few million , will earn the money needed through his own street contacts . angrily tells that he did not negotiate a good deal and that merely tricked him into thinking he did . replies that it 's time for them to " think big , " and to expand the cartel for nationwide distribution of cocaine . With them as the main North American distributors and wholesalers of the cartel , they will make millions and become the biggest cartel in the continent . warns that can not be trusted and that he will sooner or later turn against them for any slight deviation or compromise of his business . orders to stall his deal with for the time being . then promptly tells that ambitious drug dealers , such at himself , who want too much and crave money , power and attention , do not last long in the business . leaves shrugging with indifference and strikes out on his own . After this incident , then seeks out to whom he makes an unexpected marriage proposal . She is shaken but agrees to think about it . is none too happy when he hears about it and decides to take out . At the nightclub that evening , is approached and shaken down by a police detective , named ( ) . He proposes to " tax " on his transactions in return for police protection and information . is distracted by the sight of dancing with a local drug dealer . He follows the two to a restroom stall where he berates for her promiscuous conduct . He asks to take her home . On the way admits she is attracted to . wards her off , mindful of 's obsessive protection of her . Back at the nightclub , is attacked by two gunmen but manages to escape , killing them both despite being wounded by a gunshot to his left shoulder . sent and the hit - men , asks one of his bodyguards , ( ) , to call after arrives at 's office at 3:00 a.m. that very night and inform him the hit failed . , and visit at his car dealership back office , who is with . . calls , who confirms his involvement by playing the call off as telling him she 'll be late home . When it becomes apparent that ( who is armed ) will not help him , begs for 's forgiveness , saying that he can have and ten million dollars in exchange for sparing his life . will have none of it , and coldly executes . insists that he could be a valuable ally for , but disagrees , and kills him too . , and then look upon the late 's personal bodyguard ( ) and offer him a choice of being killed or work for them . naturally agrees to work for . His problems apparently solved , begins a profitable relationship with over the next year and - a - half . marries , buys a huge mansion complete with surveillance cameras and numerous luxury items , and even sets up in business with her own beauty salon complete with a paid staff . and soon begin a romantic relationship , but they keep it secret from who had firmly stated to that he does not want her dating anybody ( at least not anyone in the drug dealing 's business grows , so does his cocaine addiction and paranoia , and he begins to spiral out of control ... the beginning of the end . His wife , who becomes further addicted to cocaine , becomes bored and emotionally distant . 's banker ( ) informs him that laundering the increasing flow of drug money has become increasingly difficult , so he will be charging higher fees , up to 10 % . A Jewish mob boss , named ( ) , contacts , offering his assistance . However , as they are cleaning out the money , reveals himself to be an undercover cop and arrests along with . After posting a $ 5 million in bail , 's corrupt lawyer , ( ) , tells him that although he may get him cleared of the corruption and money laundering charges , will probably have to serve at least three years in prison for income tax evasion . suggests that he take it , as the American prison system is nowhere near as harsh as its Cuban counterpart , and the right legal loopholes could trim the sentence down to six months . However , the strung - out yells that he would rather die than spend a single day in jail . After hearing about 's arrest , , not wanting to lose his main distributor , offers a way out of going to prison . He calls back to where he introduces him to his cocaine " board of directors " a group that includes a sugar land baron , 's military chief , and a mysterious named ( ) . We assume he is a corrupt officer because guarantees that the will not be able to send to jail . But this help comes at a price . A Bolivian journalist is attempting to expose the ongoing corruption in the Bolivian government involvement in drug trafficking , and his crusade is beginning to hurt and his partners . will be sending to assassinate the journalist , but he needs and his crew to provide some extra muscle . is clearly disturbed by the assassination since it is against his custom to kill a man whom he sees as a civilian , plus has never killed anybody who did n't wrong him personally . But seeing no other options , reluctantly agrees to help with the hit . In the meantime , 's marriage with finally ends when after a bitter altercation at a local restaurant , she finally expresses her contempt for him and the lives he had led her on , and walks out of the restaurant , and out of his life . Tony , punch - drunk on cocaine , tells the restaurant 's other patrons that his existence is necessary since society needs a man like him to call a criminal . also informs to look after things while he travels to on business ( but he does n't tell him anything about the assassination deal.)Tony , with his two trusted henchmen , and , along with travel to and places a bomb under the journalist 's car in with the intention of detonating it outside the building before the the man addresses the and exposes 's cartel . But has second thoughts when the journalist unexpectedly picks up his wife and children . , saying that the team was only supposed to kill only the journalist , shoots to prevent the journalist 's family from being killed . When authorities later discover the unexploded bomb underneath the journalist 's car , they realize that an execution had been planned and increase the amount of security protecting the journalist . is now the primary suspect and vows to get even with . Returning to , discovers that and ( who opposed the trip to ) have disappeared . visits his mother again where she angrily tells him about 's descent into an immoral life and accuses him of corrupting her with his flashy lifestyle . After getting 's home address from , goes to the house in nearby . Much to 's surprise , unexpectedly opens the door in his bathrobe . then sees in a night gown at the top of the stairs . Enraged that another man has obviously slept with his sister , shoots dead . Hysterical , reveals to that they had just been married and were going to surprise him . , riddled with guilt , has taken back to his mansion . In revenge for 's failure to kill the journalist , who has now exposed and his partners to the world as drug lords , sends a mercenary hit squad ( the size of a large platoon ) , to 's mansion to kill him that evening . Sitting at his desk snorting from an enormous pile of cocaine , realizes and regrets what he has done to his best friend . He takes a call from and berates him , telling him he 's prepared for whatever can throw at him . When is contemplating his actions , 's mercenaries breach the main gate at 's estate and quietly begin to kill all the guards around the mansion . At the same time , a distraught , wearing only an unbuttoned sleep shirt and armed with a revolver , enters 's office to confront him with the truth about his feelings for her . She now realizes that loves her in an unnatural way and demands , at gunpoint , that he make love to her . She begins to shoot at him while demanding he take her . A assassin hiding on the balcony , thinking is shooting at him , leaps in and riddles her with bullets . An enraged throws the man off the balcony and kills him with his sub - machine gun creating a storm of chaos at the mansion . At this point , the mercenaries , robbed of the element of surprise by the gunshots , swarm in to attack 's mansion from all directions . As all his men are being killed , including and the , , still delirious from the cocaine , leans over 's dead body begging for forgiveness , at the same time the break into the mansion . opens fire with an as he falls back and ends up banging on the door to 's office ( it has been locked from the inside by who was planning to kill ) . Unfortunately , does not seem to hear him . is shot in the back and sees it on the security cameras . As the hit men prepare to storm into his office , finally snaps out of his drug - induced state , arms himself with an M16A1 assault rifle with an under - mounted M203 grenade launcher and blows down the door . A huge climatic gun battle begins as takes position atop the grand staircase and guns down dozens of 's men who try to storm the balcony . is hit a number of times by return fire , but he keeps shooting . With most of 's men dead , , strung - out on drugs , defiantly yells out at the assassins , not realizing that the has sneaked into the room behind him . The shoots in the back with a 12 - shotgun . falls off the balcony and into a reflecting pool at the base of the grand staircase . In the final shot , as the and the few surviving assassins look on , lies dead ... face down in the bloody reflecting pool which is located below a large brass globe that says : THE IS YOURS.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > I\\nThe orphan leaves his home on the island of ( " " ) . After arriving in in 1776 , meets , , , and ( " , " ) , and impresses them with his rhetorical skills ( " My " ) . They affirm their revolutionary goals to each other ( " The of " ) . Meanwhile , wealthy sisters , , and go into town seeking out potential suitors ( " The " ) . warns everyone about the dangers of , but disagrees and tries to counter ( " " ) . then insists on his authority ( " You 'll Be Back " ) . During the and campaign , accepts a position as 's aide - de - camp ( " " ) , instead of field command . At 's ball ( " A 's Ball " ) , falls hopelessly in love with , who reciprocates her feelings , and the two later marry each other ( " " ) , as suppresses her feelings for the sake of their happiness at the wedding ( " Satisfied " ) . After the wedding , congratulates on his position as aide - de - camp to ; admits that he would much rather have 's position on the battlefield ( " The of ( ) " ) . reflects on 's swift rise while considering his career as more cautious ( " Wait For conditions worsen for the , Laurens in a duel against ( " Stay Alive " ) , who insulted . injures , who in turn yields ( " " ) . is temporarily suspended by ( " Meet Me Inside " ) over the duel and is sent home . There , reveals that she is pregnant with her first child , and asks to slow down to take in what has happened in their lives ( " That Would Be Enough " ) . After convinces to get involved on the colonists ' side ( " and " ) , he urges to call back to help plan the final of . agrees but explains to - who is convinced he should die a martyr and a hero in war - that he should be careful with his actions because whatever he does will be known for ages to come ( " History Has Its Eyes on You " ) . At the of , meets up with to take down the , revealing that was recruited as a spy , helping them figure out how to trap the and win the war ( " ( The Turned Upside Down)").Soon after the victory at , asks the rebels how they will succeed in governing on their own ( " What Comes Next ? " ) . Lafayette returns to with plans to inspire his people to have their revolution . 's son is born , while has a daughter , , and the two tell their children how they will do anything to protect them ( " " ) . receives word that his friend has been killed in a seemingly pointless battle after the war was won and throws himself into his work ( " Tomorrow There 'll Be More of Us " ) . He co - authors The and is selected as of the by newly - elected . Eliza begs to stay . moves to with her new husband ( " Non - Stop").Act returns to from being the ambassador to ( " What 'd I Miss " ) . In 1789 , and debate the latter 's financial proposals at a meeting . pulls aside and tells him to figure out a compromise to win over ( " # 1").Eliza and her family - along with , back from - travel upstate during the summer , while stays home to work on the compromise ( " Take a " ) . begins an affair with , making him vulnerable to her husband 's blackmail ( " Say No To This " ) . , , and create the of 1790 over a private dinner , exchanging 's financial plan for placing the country 's permanent capital on the . is envious of 's sway in the government and wishes he had similar power ( " The Where It Happens " ) . Burr switches political parties and defeats , making now a rival ( " another meeting , and argue over whether the should assist in its conflict with . ultimately agrees with 's argument for remaining neutral ( " # 2 " ) . In the wake of this , , , and decide to join forces to find a way to discredit in 's eyes ( " on Your Side " ) . decides to retire from the presidency , and assists in writing a farewell address ( " One Last Time").A flabbergasted receives word that has stepped down , and will be replaced by signatory ( " I Know " ) . becomes the second and fires , who publishes an inflammatory critique of the new president as a response ( " " ) . In the face of accusations of speculation of government funds by , , and - and out of fear that his affair with will be used against him in his political career ( " We chooses to publicize his affair ( " " ) in the ( " The " ) , damaging his relationship with . , in a heartbroken retaliation , burns all the letters wrote her , trying to erase herself from history ( " Burn " ) . , instructed by , challenges to a duel and is critically injured ( " Blow Us All Away " ) and dies ( " Stay Alive ( ) " ) , causing a reconciliation between and ( " It 's 's endorsement of in the presidential election of 1800 ( " The of 1800 " ) results in further animosity between and , who challenges to a duel via an exchange of letters ( " Your Servant " ) . writes his last letter in a rush while tells him to go back to bed ( " Best of and of " ) . and travel to for the . During the duel , both and fire at each other after ten paces , with intentionally missing ( throwing away ) his shot . dies as a result , with and at his side . Burr laments that even though he survived , he is cursed to be remembered as the villain who killed ( " The Was Wide Enough " ) . The musical closes with a reflection on historical memory , showing how kept 's legacy alive ( " Who Lives , Who Dies , Who Tells Your Story").</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > After their mother succumbs to a stroke she suffers at a community swimming pool , twin brother and sister receive final requests in their immigrant mother 's will . To fulfill her wishes , they must journey to her birthplace in an unnamed Middle - country ( based on during the movie contains a series of flashbacks to the mother 's life ( ) . , a Middle - is impregnated by a refugee ( likely a refugee in ) . 's infuriated brothers kill her lover as he and try to escape . She reveals to her grandmother that she is pregnant . They keep the pregnancy secret in order to save face . Upon the baby 's birth , the grandmother tattoos the infant 's heel , and they give the baby boy away . follows her promise to her grandmother to study in ( a fictional city ) during which a civil war breaks out . Under threat of war , returns to find her lost son . has preceded her arrival as she discovers her son 's orphanage at has been destroyed . She then pretends to be a to board a bus with other fleeing to get to the camp where her son has been moved.\\nOn the way to the camp her bus is attacked by armed . She and a Muslim woman and her daughter survive , only to have the bus covered in gas to be burnt . escapes by showing her cross . They would not spare the woman , so claims the other woman 's daughter as her own . However , the daughter runs back to the bus and is shot.\\nDisillusioned , joins a radical organization . She is planted as a French tutor for a prominent Christian leader and assassinates him . She is sent to prison for 15 years , and as prisoner number 72 , despite all efforts of her captors , she remains resolute and becomes known as " The Who Sings " . Before her release , her enraged captors call upon the torture specialist to break her spirit and stop her singing . He rapes her repeatedly and she gives birth to twins in the jail . A nurse secretly saves the babies and returns them to after her release . Nawal emigrates to with the twins.\\nUpon her death , leaves a will requesting that her children , and , find their father and lost brother . refuses , but continues on her own , following in her mother 's footsteps . She finds her extended family . They refuse to speak to because of the shame her mother brought on the family . She then finds the prison and learns from a former employee that her mother was tortured and gave birth in prison . He gives her the name of the nurse who assisted during , she calls to join her . He arrives with their mother 's former employer from . They find the nurse and ask about the baby who was born in prison . The nurse reveals their mother gave birth to twins , and whom she safeguarded.\\nA local notary identifies the name of their lost half - brother as of . They trace the warlord who conducted the revenge attack on and destroyed the orphanage . learns that the warlord had spared the children and took them in and trained them to fight alongside them . becomes a sniper and searches for his mother . He becomes crazed with war but is refused the chance to become a martyr by the warlord . He returns to as a sniper and is eventually captured by the enemy . They turn him to their side and train him to be a prison torturer . He is sent to the prison where 's mother was held . The warlord reveals that adopts the name discovered that their father is their half - brother , they find out that he too had moved to . They find him , and deliver the letters from their motherone for the father and one for the son . We learn that after many years living in , while swimming in a pool , had spotted a man with a tattooed heel . She approaches him and although he does not recognise her , she realises upon seeing his face that he was also her rapist in prison . She suffers a stroke from the shock and eventually dies , giving instructions to her employer , a notary , about the letters and instructions for her children . Their task fulfilled , the children are now allowed to leave an engraved headstone at her grave.\\nHer first son , , having read the letters , realises what he had done to his own mother , and visits her grave.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > Over three decades after his time at , " " is serving as a test pilot . As " " approaches to shut down the hypersonic " " scramjet program and redirect the funds to drone programs , flies the prototype to its speed objective , then pushes further into high - hypersonic speed , destroying it . wants to ground for his recklessness but instead sends him to as a instructor under the orders of 's friend and former rival , " " , the commander of the . Maverick is ordered to train an elite group of / / pilots assembled by " " and " " for an urgent mission : to bomb a foreign country 's unsanctioned uranium enrichment plant . The plant sits in a deep depression at the end of a canyon and is defended by surface - to - air missiles and fifth - generation Su-57 fighters operating from a nearby air base . Maverick plans an attack with two pairs of , which will fly through a canyon and destroy the plant . The pilots initially rebuff , particularly " " and " " , the son of 's late best friend and " " . As the pilots train for the mission , friction develops between and , who resents 's cavalier attitude towards his wingmen , while criticizes 's caution . As the pilots observe , they reassess and coalesce around him . also reunites with former girlfriend , to whom he reveals that 's now - dead mother made him promise to keep her son from flying , and blocked 's application to the , setting back his career . Maverick later meets with , who has throat cancer and primarily communicates by typing on a computer . about teaching the team , he passes away days later , and along with the pilots , attend his funeral where a missing man formation is observed . With dead , removes as mission trainer and sets new parameters that are less risky on approach but riskier on exit . However , makes an unauthorized flight of the simulated course with the original parameters , proving that it could be done . is convinced and reluctantly appoints as strike leader . Maverick chooses the mission team and pairs himself with and her , while is paired with and his . and the remaining pilots are put on standby . The team launches from the aircraft carrier while the guided - missile cruiser fires cruise missiles to destroy the air base near the plant . The team reaches the plant and destroys it , but is attacked by surface - to - air missiles and a pair of patrolling Su-57 . When runs out of countermeasures , sacrifices his jet to protect him and ejects . Believing to be killed in action , the remaining aircraft return to the carrier . Against orders , turns back and saves from a Mi-24 helicopter gunship , but is shot down by another surface - to - air missile and ejects nearby . The two reunite and head towards the destroyed airbase , where they steal an F-14 Tomcat and head back to the carrier . Maverick and shoot down two intercepting Su-57s , but a third arrives as they run out of ammunition and countermeasures . arrives from standby to shoot down the Su-57 , and the planes return to cheer on the carrier , where and reconcile . Some time after the mission , and work together on a at a hangar near the test facility where was previously stationed . arrives with her daughter , and takes her for a ride in the . Rooster walks to a photo board and acknowledges a photo of their mission 's success , alongside a photo of his late father and a younger > 

 < synopsis > The titles appear as a young child babbles while picking through childhood mementos found in a cigar box . An adult woman is recalling formative events of her childhood in the small town of , that was " a tired old town even in 1932 " when she " first knew it . " They had recently been told they " had nothing to fear but fear itself , " which refers to 's inaugural address of 1933 . She was six years old that summer . " " ( ) , wearing bib overalls and her hair in bangs , greets , a farmer who is dropping off some hickory nuts . She summons her father ( ) to thank him . When leaves , explains that he is embarrassed to have to pay for " some legal work " in this way . Their cook ( ) wants 's older brother ( ) to come in for breakfast , but he is sulking in his treehouse because says he is " too old to play football for the . " ( ) across the street assures them that he is respected as a very skilled lawyer . In the patch of their neighbor they discover a boy a little older than . He is ( ) , staying with his for the summer . They tell him about the neighbor two houses away they have never seen . describes him as a homicidal maniac of frightening appearance . Dill 's ( ) adds to the story . At 5:00 o'clock they walk to meet , returning home , and pass by elderly , who rails at them from her porch . handles her with his customary grace and sensitivity . That evening , listens to read aloud . When she asks about , reminds her that he has told them " to leave those poor people alone . " They reminisce about her mother , who died when was two and was six . ( ) comes to ask to defend in a problematic case involving a man named . He is relieved and grateful when agrees to . The next day , dares to go up to the 's porch . ca n't avoid it when , rolling in a loose tire , ends up at the foot of their steps . Dill suggests they all go to the courthouse to see where had been locked up . They end up looking in to the preliminary hearing concerning . is a black man who has been accused of raping and beating a young white woman , . ( ) , the girl 's father , confronts in the hallway . He tells he is concerned that " people are saying you believed 's story agin ourn . " He becomes quite hostile , but remains calm , and cold . At night , Dill prompts to look in a back window of the house . The shadow of a man in a baggy shirt looms over , and the shadow of his hand reaches out to touch . When cowers in , the man quietly withdraws . The children flee . 's overalls get caught in the chickenwire fence , and he has to leave them . Dill is called home , and he says , " See you next summer . " When goes back to get his pants , hears a gunshot , but returns safely . They go around to the street to find the neighbors in an uproar because had fired to frighten " a prowler . " calmly says the excitement is over . On her first day of school , feels very awkward wearing a dress . She has a rough first day , and gets in a fight with young , breaks up the fight and invites to have lunch at their house . learns that has his own gun , and hunts rabbits and squirrels with his dad for food . tells of getting his first gun , when his father told him it was " sin to shoot a mockingbird , " because it does no harm , but only sings . Scout is appalled when drowns his plate in syrup , but gives her a lecture on hospitality . That evening , when she complains about school , teaches her about empathy and compromise . spots a rabid dog wandering down their street , approaching their house . takes the children inside and calls , who shows up with the local sheriff , ( ) . has a hunting rifle but does n't believe he can make the shot . He asks to shoot the dog ; is reluctant but takes up the rifle when insists . After removing his glasses , shoots the dog dead with one shot , much to the astonishment of . Tate starts to tell and that is the best shot in the county but stops him and leaves with the sheriff . Both children ask to go with when he visits 's wife , . Waiting in the car , falls asleep , but is frightened when drunken lurches against the window , and calls " . " reassures , " He 's all bluff , " and says that he wished he could keep the ugly things in this world away from them , but knows that is not possible . When he drives home , waits nervously , listening to the spooky night sounds . Scout continues to have fights at school , because people denigrate for defending a . He explains that he has to defend , or he could not hold his head up in town . He tells her she must not fight , no matter what people say . In a hole in a tree in front of the 's , the children find two carved figures that look just like them . appears and cements up the hole . That night , shows a box filled with all sorts of little gifts that he had found in the tree . He tells her how the night he went back to get his " britches " he had found them " folded across the fence . summer comes , Dill returns , and 's trial is due to start soon . He has spent the year in the jail , because the thought he would be safer there . Now he is back at the town jail , and expects trouble . takes a reading light , and leaves . wants to check on him , and he and and walk downtown . is reading in a chair on the jail porch . Suddenly , numerous cars arrive , and men with rifles approach . The children push their way forward . refuses when tells them to go home . There is an impasse , until recognizes , and politely and in and empathetic tone , speaks to him about the legal work is doing for him . Something in 's tone makes look ashamed and he gets the mob to leave with him . Next morning , crowds arrive to attend the trial , and the children go down to the courthouse . They are able to find a place with ( ) in the gallery , with all the black people who have turned out for the trial . In the 's testimony establishes that ( ) was badly beaten on the right side of her face and had finger marks all around her neck . testifies that he returned from one of his fields to hear screaming , and that he saw who did it . gets up to leave and has to tell him to remain for his questions . He asks why no doctor was called , and gets to write his name . The judge points out that this shows he is left handed . feels tricked . testifies that she asked to " bust up " a chifforobe ( a piece of furniture like a wardrobe ) in the yard , and that when she went in to get him a nickel he followed her and attacked her . asks her if her father got riled when he drank , and asks if he had ever beaten her . is extremely uncomfortable , and her testimony is inconsistent . When ( ) stands to be identified , asks him to catch a small drinking glass he tosses to him . tells to try catching it with his left hand , to which replies he ca n't ; his left arm is crippled because he caught in a cotton gin when he was twelve . When he asks how could have done what she claims , she breaks down and rails at and the jury , saying she wants the man guilty of beating her punished . She then refuses to say anymore and is taken back to her father . The prosecutor rests , and calls to the stand . is dignified and articulate , but increasingly uncomfortable . He testifies that he busted up a chifforobe for " way last spring . . . way over a year ago , " and refused the nickel she offered . After that he did lots of favors that she asked him to do , until one day she got him in the house and grabbed him and told him to kiss her . " cussed at her from the window " and said he " was gon na kill her . examination , the prosecutor ( ) gets to admit he is " strong enough to choke the breath out of a woman and sling her to the floor . " He scoffs at 's helpfulness and says : " You felt sorry for her ? A white woman?"After the prosecutor has spoken his closing argument , is allowed to give his . points out the lack of evidence , the fact that no doctor examined and that was beaten by someone left handed . He says that he has pity for , " a victim of cruel poverty and ignorance , " but can not let her put a man 's life at stake to cover her guilt at breaking the social code . In the gallery , watches the proceedings , mesmerized . He asks the how long the jury has been out deciding the verdict . The tells them it 's been nearly two hours when the jury returns , bringing back a verdict of guilty . The judge dismisses them and leaves , slamming his door . tells that he had told they would " probably lose this one . the white people leave the court . The blacks in the gallery watch gather his papers . Gradually , they all stand out of respect . says , " , stand up . Your fathers passin' . "Back at home , tells a disconsolate that his father is one of those " men in this world who are born to do our unpleasant jobs for us . " arrives and talks with , who then reports that has been killed . A deputy had shot at him and had " missed his aim " when " broke loose and ran . . . like a crazy man . " He says that on appeal they would have had " more than a good chance . "Jem insists on accompanying to go tell 's family . arrives and spits at , who calmly wipes his face and leaves . In , wears a ham costume in a school pageant ; she is dressed as a large ham . She wears it walking home with after dark because she could n't find her overalls after the performance was over . In a small grove they often walk through as a shortcut , they are attacked by an unseen assailant . yells loudly and is thrown to the ground , unconscious . The attacker grabs . Another man in a baggy shirt arrives and there is a struggle with their attacker . Scout can not see well from inside her costume , but she hears a loud grunt and sees the man in the baggy shirt carrying to their house . Scout wriggles out of her ham costume and gets home finding is unconscious , with a badly broken arm . runs out of the house yelling for and she runs into his arms sobbing and babbling about what happened . After a doctor has come to take care of , investigates the scene where the kids were attacked and reports that has been killed with " a kitchen knife . " He asks to tell him what happened . She only has limited detail but says she was saved from by a man she could n't see very well . Just then , sees the man who rescued them behind 's door , and realizes it is ( ) . He recoils slightly when gently pulls the door away from him , allowing to see his face . She takes him by the hand , and invites him to " say goodnight to . " When he hesitates to touch , she reassures him that he " can pet him , " since he is asleep . Boo strokes 's head gently . Scout and go out to their front porch , sitting quietly while discusses the incident with . , thinking wielded the knife , begins to consider a case of self defense involving , when the sheriff corrects him . He says decisively : " fell on his knife . " He implies that must have killed . He says he feels did a civic duty " to do his utmost to prevent a crime from being committed , " and that to " drag him into the limelight " would be " a sin . " Scout agrees-- that it would be like shooting a mockingbird . shakes 's hand , and says , " Thank you , , for my children . " Scout walks back to his front door.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > An inbound train pulls in to light rail station , and professional thief ( ) exits , disguised as a paramedic . He enters a nearby hospital , where the uniform allows him to walk through the emergency room unnoticed . He registers the activity going on around him as he travels down the hall holding a clipboard , acting like just another employee as he drives off in a ambulance . At a construction supplier , one of 's associates , ( ) , purchases some explosive charges , showing a valid driver 's license , and pays in cash when the clerk asks him how he wants to pay . Meanwhile , ( ) , a robbery - homicide detective for the , after having sex with his wife ( ) , leaves for work . Just after he leaves , his 15 - year - old stepdaughter , ( ) , suffers a slight breakdown in front of her mother while she 's preparing to meet her father . This same day , , , and three other men , ( ) , ( ) , and ( ) , carry out the robbery of a armored car . and , wearing paramedic uniforms , station the stolen ambulance on just east of the 10 / Interstate 110 overpass . While this happens , is picked up at a caf by in a stolen green big rig tow truck . As they drive towards the scheduled ambush point , tries to make conversation with , who merely asks for him to shut up . Waingro is quite agitated at the order . They park their truck underneath the highway at a 90 degree angle to the street . tails the armored car as it leaves the depot and radios in its location as it gets closer to them . When radios back that the armored car is 300 yards away , , , and slip on hockey goalie masks to conceal their faces . They then move their vehicles into position . puts the ambulance in drive , activates the lights and siren , and starts to execute a three - point turn to block the armored car as it approaches from the west on , while floors the gas pedal of the tow truck . The armored car stops , its path obstructed by . The two guards in the back are reading their newspapers , oblivious to what is about to happen . As he waits , the driver looks left and his eyes go wide when he sees the tow truck bearing down on him . The tow truck rams the armored car at full speed , and the impact partially caves in the truck 's grille , while the armored car turns over and slides 50 feet on its passenger side into a car dealership parking lot . As the dust settles , the robbers climb out of their vehicles carrying assault rifles and pistols and take up positions around the overturned truck as one of the guards makes a radio call for help . Hearing a dispatch call for a " 211 " ( armed robbery ) on his police scanner , radios to the others that they have three minutes , and starts a stopwatch . sets off an explosive charge to blow open the back doors . and then climb into the armored car and drag out the now - deaf and shaken guards , and hand them over to , who holds the them at bay on the sidewalk with a pistol . While and cover the street , runs a spike strip across the street to stop any police that pursue them , and searches the truck for several envelopes . When yells that they have eighty seconds remaining on the clock , suddenly gets aggressive and pistol - whips the first guard , who ca n't hear 's order to back up . harshly admonishes Waingro , calling him " . "Once has found the specific envelope the crew is after , he exits the back of the truck and the men begin to head back to the ambulance and move out . Waingro mutters something about the guard challenging him and suddenly shoots the first guard in the face , killing him instantly . The second guard tries to reach for a backup revolver in his ankle holster , but shoots him with an automatic rifle . The guard is thrown back against the armored car and crumples dead . holds his rifle on the last guard , looking to with approval . With a slight nod from , aims his rifle at the guard , and shoots him twice in the chest . He then steps forward and shoots the guard again in the head . They then run back to the ambulance , removing their masks as drives . is quite angry at for shooting the 1st guard , Waingro insisting the man was making a move to stop them . As the crew speeds away from the scene , the first police cars come speeding towards the scene from the other direction . The first three units are unable to see the strip in time , blow out their tires , and crash into each other . The police officers jump out of the cars and run over , frantically signalling the units right behind them to stop just in the nick of time . As the police descend on the area , and his crew pile out of the ambulance a few blocks away and climb into a nearby station wagon . plants a firebomb in the back of the ambulance that destroys their weapons and gear as they drive away . That evening , meets in a parking garage with ( ) , his money - laundering expert . tells that the envelope they stole contains hundreds of millions in bearer bonds from a company called & , owned by a crooked entrepreneur named ( ) . agrees to set up a meeting where will send someone with cash to exchange for the bonds . tells of another job offered by a man named , that will bring in at least $ 10 million . agrees to meet with ( ) . also asks what went wrong with the heist , but refuses to talk about it . At the scene of the heist , arrives and begins investigating . With are his team of detectives , ( ) , ( ) , . , ( ) and . ( ) . The vehicles left at the scene of the robbery have been identified - the big rig was reported stolen out of two weeks earlier and 's pickup truck out of two days prior to the robbery . Other than that , there are no leads -- only a nickname , " " , dropped by , was heard by a homeless man across the street . is able to recount the heist itself quite accurately , noting that those who committed it are definitely professionals . He orders his team to begin talking to their informants and fences to find out who might be handling the money . He also charges Casals with running the name " " as an alias to the , knowing that it likely wo n't lead anywhere but wants it checked anyway . At a truck stop diner in a different part of town , the rest of the crew and wait for , who shows up . He tells them all that has forfeited his share of the heist and he beats him briefly in full view of the other diners . is nervous because of the killings of the three guards which will warrant a deeper investigation by the 's robbery / homicide unit . As they all leave , suddenly hits Waingro , and throws him to the pavement with the intention of killing him . He is about to shoot with his pistol when yells for him to stop . He has spotted a police car on the street . They watch nervously , hoping the police officers have n't noticed them . There is a sigh of relief when the police car suddenly activates its lights and siren , makes a u - turn , and drives away . When looks back , has vanished . He and the others search the immediate area , but find no sign of him . At his home , gets into a heated argument with his wife , ( ) about the amount of money he 's brought home from the heist -- it 's considerably less than was expecting . tells her he 'd paid off his bookies . When she challenges him on his gambling problem , he tells her she can leave and storms out . The next morning , and bust in on the chop shop of ( ) , one of 's informants . After a tense conversation where intimidates and threatens him with jail time , tells that his brother will meet with at a club in at 2 AM with a possible lead in the case . meets with 's associate , ( ) . tells about a new potential heist - the main downtown branch of the collects hard currency for distribution to its other branches . On certain days of the week , the bank holds at least $ 10 million . scoffs at the idea at first ; it would be impossible for his team to rob the bank without at least one employee setting off an alarm that the police would respond to rapidly . , a computer hacker himself , tells that he knows how to reprogram the alarm system to shut itself down 15 minutes before they arrive . agrees to take the job and gives him 's business number . returns to his oceanside apartment and finds sleeping on his living room floor . makes him coffee and asks him what 's going wrong with his personal life and his marriage . explains a few things and reminds him of an inmate they knew in who 's longtime mantra was not to have anything serious enough in their personal lives that they ca n't leave behind in a hurry ( " 30 seconds flat " ) if they know they 'll be caught as criminals . tells they 're going to get their money from for the bearer bonds they 'd stolen and then take 's bank job . sets up arrangements to transfer the bonds . A few days after the armored car robbery , he calls at a payphone and tells him to have one of his employees call him back with an arranged meeting point to exchange the bearer bonds for cash . While he 's on hold , notices ( ) , ' wife , at a cheap hotel with another man , ( ) . One of 's bookies calls back to inform that the meeting will be tomorrow at a drive - in movie theater . Afterward , confronts , warning her to give one last chance . goes to the club in mentioned , and talks to who tells him that he was incarcerated with a man whom he saw outside prison recently who pulls off large heists , getting 's name . He calls his unit immediately and tells them to set up extensive surveillance on everyone associates with . goes to the drive - in theater where has arranged to make the exchange . The drop man arrives shortly thereafter in a pickup truck . orders the driver to hold his hands up to prove that he is not holding any weapons , and then instructs the man to toss the package with his right hand into 's shotgun seat . Unbeknownst to , an assassin armed with a machine pistol is hiding in the back of the pickup and preparing to kill him . As the assassin creeps up to the passenger 's side window of 's car and aims his gun , , armed with a rifle and stationed on the rooftop of the projection building , spots him and gives a warning through his headset . The next moments happen in an instant : looks in his rear - view mirror , sees the assassin , and instantly floors the car in reverse , crushing the assassin against the pickup and injuring his leg . rolls over once , aims his rifle , and fires at the pickup truck . Bullets hit the windshield , splintering it , and the truck pulls forward . The assassin , struggling to regain his footing , fires a wild burst at 's car , and fires back through his windshield with his pistol . Now with a clean opening , draws a bead on the assassin and shoots him in the back . The hit spins the assassin around , at which point fires another round that hits him in the chest , before his car runs over the assassin , killing him . Just as the driver is about to reach the exit , steps out from behind the fence and kills him by emptying a shotgun into the truck . The now driverless and bullet - riddled truck rolls to a stop against the berm . As they leave , examines the package and finds nothing but scrap paper . later calls and tells him to forget about the payment and very slyly threatens to kill him . What , and do not realize is that in this time , has started to work for . Nor do they know that the guard shot in the armored car robbery is not 's first victim : he is a serial killer who kills young prostitutes . Later , while at a party with his fellow detectives , is called away to a motel where one of 's victims has been found stuffed into a garbage can by a pool . is exasperated upon learning that the dead girl 's family has shown up . When the distraught mother arrives , stops her from seeing her daughter 's body and holds her while she wails . and his men begin to pull another heist at a precious metals repository . deactivates the alarm system above the ground on a utility pole and begins to crack a safe inside , while himself stands guard out front watching for trouble . Across the street , hidden in moving vans , , his detectives , and a team , observe the scene , watching stand guard , on infrared monitoring equipment . While they watch , one of the team members in 's van sits down , banging his rifle against the wall of the truck . , standing watch outside , hears the noise . He looks right in the direction of the police surveillance trucks . Realizing they 're being watched , he quickly enters the repository and orders and to withdraw , to ' chagrin . The three men leave empty - handed and orders the officers on the stakeout to let the crew go , as he knows that simple breaking - and - entering would carry a shorter sentence than outright theft would . A short time later , and his team observe , and seemingly casing another job near a shipyard . When and his guys leave , and his men go to the scene and try to figure out what 's next heist will be . They determine that there 's nothing worth stealing from any of the businesses in the immediate area . Suddenly , has an epiphany ; he realizes that 's casing of the area was a ruse to lure himself and his crew out in the open . , from a high vantage point on a cargo crane , takes pictures of the detectives with a high - powered camera . With the pictures , is able , through , to identify and his men . When meets with to pick up the schematics for 's bank heist , tells him about , who has a long and successful history of taking down major criminals and that " admires " . decides that the heist is still worth the risk . returns to his house & finds that his wife is gone . decides to join a surveillance team trailing in unmarked cars and a helicopter on an freeway . is taken to one of the ground units and pulls over , seemingly on a routine traffic violation . He cheerfully invites to join him at a nearby restaurant where they both reflect on their own personal lives . During their meeting says that while he may not like it , he will kill if need be to prevent the latter from killing an innocent . points out the " flip side " by saying that he will not hesitate to kill if the cops box him in . also explains the purpose of his " 30 seconds " creed by saying he never wants to go back to prison . The best - laid plans of the thieves for the bank heist are being secretly thwarted behind the scenes by . Waingro has been laying low since 's attempt on his life at the truck stop ; he eventually meets after looking for criminal work in a biker bar after one of his prostitute killings . Waingro leads to , who calls and tells him that the police are following him . tells to head in the opposite direction to throw the police off them . When receives the call , he , and are eating at a local diner . has just spotted an old prison friend of his behind the grill - an ex - con named ( ) , who is currently frustrated with his job as a short - order cook , especially since the manager is a jerk who treats him like dirt and extorts part of his pay . approaches and offers to give him the job of getaway driver as a last - minute substitute for . Given how much he hates his boss , simply can not refuse 's offer and quits , pausing momentarily to throw his slimy and oppressive boss to the floor . With his wife being beaten and raped by and 's crew , is forced to reveal 's latest plans . One of 's subordinates , a police informant named ( ) , then tips off the police as to which bank plans to hit . At 11:30 , 's enters the downtown . While waits in the car , , and take up strategic positions inside the bank 's lobby wearing business suits to hide their weapons and spare magazines . They enter through different doors to avoid raising suspicion . Once inside the lobby , they take up positions near lobby guards . and station themselves at either end of the lobby , while waits in line at a teller 's desk . gives a small cough , signaling for him and to slip on their ski masks . At that point , sets down a briefcase at the teller 's desk , then suddenly whirls around and hits the guard closest to him with a small sap , and tackles him to the floor . Simultaneously , and whip out assault rifles , order everyone in the bank to get on the floor , and disarm the other guards by binding their hands behind their backs with zip ties and then removing their service weapons . stands atop the teller windows and informs the customers that they are not going to be hurt and they wo n't lose their own money because it 's insured by the federal government . He then punches an uncooperative bank manager in the mouth , grabs the man 's vault key , and hands it to . While and guard the lobby , unlocks the double doors to the vault , unloads a set of empty gym bags , and begins packing the money into them . The money sheets are packed so tightly that has to cut the wrapping open with a folding knife to fit them in . loads three bags , each one containing $ 4 million - two for and one for himself . relays one bag over to in the lobby , who removes his ski mask , dons a set of sunglasses and begins to walk out . Meanwhile , at headquarters , a detective receives a phone call from about and his crew planning to rob the bank and quickly relays it to who shouts out the location and all of the officers , included , race to the bank . When they arrive , they see that and his crew have already begun to exit the bank . orders everyone to capture them in the car and to watch their backgrounds if they have to begin shooting . At the bank , and his crew quietly leave the bank carrying their bags over their shoulders . walks across the plaza to the car where waits , climbs into the backseat , and laughs as he pats 's shoulder . Once has gotten into the car , walks across the plaza and climbs into the shotgun seat . The last to cross the plaza is . Just as reaches the car , a - truck moves and he spots an armed and standing across the street . immediately raises his rifle and opens fire on and . As bystanders dive for cover , and , stationed just up the sidewalk , open fire on . fires a burst out the left passenger window , and turns and fires at and . Despite wearing a bulletproof vest , suddenly falls when a bullet hits him in the neck and is killed almost instantly . then gets into the car as checks 's pulse . starts to pull away from the curb , tires screeching , as fires a burst out the rear window . and break cover and run down the street . Cheritto fires at them through a side window . Seeing a police roadblock forming ahead of them , fires through the front windshield . Sprinting to the street corner , raises his shotgun and shoots out the car 's left rear tire . As tries to regain control of the car , and Casals open up on the car . is killed when a bullet strikes him in the head , and the car rear - ends an abandoned vehicle . , and get out of their car as police officers behind the roadblock begin firing pistols and shotguns at them , and open fire . and his remaining detectives , pursuing on foot , fire on the three robbers from behind as they exchange fire with the police officers , whose only cover is a chain of six police cars . Several of the officers manning the roadblock are wounded . , and fire back at 's men , providing suppressing fire for each other as they advance up the street , while the others shoot at the blockade , riddling the police cars with bullet holes . manages to shoot one of 's other detectives , ( ) , and becomes separated from and . reaches the roadblock first , and while firing at a police car has failed to check to his left . Casals spots and shoots him in the shoulder . fires another suppressing burst at the police cars , bringing down another officer , then slings the wounded over his shoulder and carries him toward a grocery store parking lot . As makes his way across the parking lot , two officers - one carrying a shotgun and another carrying a pistol - come running around the corner . fires a burst at the officers . At that point , comes running around . fires another burst , and the shotgun - wielding officer is hit in the chest . is pinned down as continues firing at him . With a clean opening , he fires four times at , but misses . promptly returns fire , and is unable to fire back because of civilians running around in front of him trying to avoid 's gunfire . By the time he has a clean aim , can only watch as puts into the backseat of an abandoned station wagon , climbs into the front seat , backs out onto the street ( pushing another car with it ) , and drives off . hears more shots and takes off running towards the sound . The noise is , who is being chased by and . As exchanges fire with them , arrives . As bystanders flee a nearby plaza , a little girl remains behind . then trips in a water fountain , gets back up , and grabs the little girl as a human shield . He then opens fire on and with his rifle . runs over , takes up a position behind , and draws a bead on him . waits until turns around towards him , giving him a clean aim . When turns around , he has only a split second to realize he has forgotten to check his surroundings before fires , the bullet hitting flush in the forehead , killing him instantly . then grabs the little girl and carries her away as , , and two uniformed officers run up to the fallen and train their weapons on him . takes to a cooperative doctor named ( ) , who treats ' wound . arranges for to pick up and keep him hidden until can find another way for them to escape - does n't trust the " out " he 'd already arranged and has to find a new way to leave town which could take several hours for to arrange . is heavily sedated after having his wound treated but tells he wo n't leave without . tells him to seriously consider the idea because of the high risk . also tells him that he believes it was who betrayed them and he has to find him . goes to 's house with the intent to kill him , only to find he 's too late : lies severely beaten and dying and his wife already dead . In his final moments , tells that and are responsible . inquires into his wife 's whereabouts , and informs him that she is dead . Distraught over his wife 's death , tells , " Do n't leave me like this " . Respecting 's final wishes , mercifully kills him and goes to 's house , where is watching a hockey game . As he 's watching , he is startled when throws a patio chair through the living room window , shattering it . trains his pistol on and demands to know 's whereabouts . When claims he does n't know , shoots him dead . Meanwhile , the police move Charlene and her son to a safe house . . explains that will be charged as an accessory to her husband and serve jail time if she refuses to turn him over to the police . also informs her that her son will become a foster child and more prone to a criminal life if she will not cooperate . , slightly recovered from the bullet wound he received from Casals , eventually shows up , sporting a new hairstyle to disguise his identity . However , despite their marital problems , his wife surreptitiously warns him that the police are present . The two share one last emotional look before gets back in his car . He comes close to being caught as he passes a police checkpoint , but a fake card shows that he has a different identity and orders to be let go . inadvertently breaks his " 30 seconds " creed by asking his new girlfriend , who he met while researching the precious metals heist , to flee the country with him . had made prior arrangements for the two to escape to ; however , upon receiving a tip concerning 's whereabouts from ( thanks to 's police contacts ) , makes the impulsive decision to kill him in his hotel room , which is near the airport . After setting off the hotel 's emergency alarm to clear the area , breaks in and executes by shooting him twice in the chest and once in the head , then escapes after disarming a stakeout detective . Having beaten further information out of , finds out where is staying and had one of his detectives leak 's location to other snitches , bail bondsmen and criminals on the street in the hope that would go for him . From a distance , spots calmly waiting in 's car . Recalling the " 30 seconds " discussion that he and had at the coffee shop ( during which mentioned his girlfriend ) , becomes suspicious and approaches . At that moment , emerges from the building and begins heading for his car , only to realize that has spotted him . grabs a shotgun and begins moving towards . At this critical and emotional moment , defaults to his " 30 seconds " rule and abandons ; he disappears into the crowd with in pursuit . jumps over the perimeter fence of the airport and heads to the freight terminal . is close behind and the two briefly exchange gunfire until moves again , finding refuge behind the and electronic control system buildings near one of the airport 's runways . follows and the two play a tense game of cat - and - mouse in the dark . notices that bright runway lights turn on periodically for landing planes ; realising that will be temporarily blinded , he makes a move to take out . However , as steps out to shoot with the lights at his back , is able to see 's shadow and , by a fraction of a second , shoots first , hitting in the shoulder . As the lights go down , quickly gains clear sight of and , knowing he will not go quietly , shoots him several times in the chest . , knowing that he has more in common with than anyone else in his life , moves to comfort his would - be killer and takes his hand in his own . reciprocates , taking some solace in his mortal wounds as he will not have to go back to prison . The two men share a final , reflective moment together before > 

 < synopsis > It is 1936 and a money runner is carrying the week 's take -- $ 11,000 -- from an illegal gambling outfit in , , to the main office . On the way , three men con him by replacing his money with tissue paper . ( ) , the mobster who was supposed to get the money , exacts revenge by having one of the con men , ( ) , killed when his men push him out a window . also orders a hit on 's partner , ( ) . goes to to escape 's wrath . In he meets ( ) , an old friend of 's . Out for revenge for 's death , they set up an elaborate plan -- a " long con " -- to swindle an enormous sum out of so neatly that he wo n't even realize he 's been conned . Posing as an obnoxious gambling boss from , gets into a high - stakes poker game with , who is known to cheat . , flustered by the first round of play , orders one of his men to replace the deck with one stacked with threes and nines , his preferred hand . Despite the stacked deck , cheats better and wins $ 15,000 from . ca n't pay it right away because his wallet is missing . ( One of 's associates picked his pocket before the game . ) sends to 's cabin to pick up the money . , playing 's resentful second - in - command , tells he has a great plan to con , but he needs " someone respectable " to place the bets . , furious at being out - cheated , bites . and company do a lot of fast work to get ready for the final phase of the long con . First they assemble a mob and rent an empty basement , transforming it in a couple of days into a prosperous gambling parlor . An announcer ( ) in a back room describes horse races as if they were happening live -- but he 's reading from a ticker tape , so the results are known in advance . They choose a race with odds they like -- maybe 3:1 or 4:1 -- and call in a tip ( a particular horse or horses to win , place , or show ) to the pay phone at the corner drugstore , where is waiting . 's gang has also rented a room with a view of the corner drugstore ; when comes out on his way to the gambling den , a watcher rings a buzzer to warn them he 's coming . They run through this once with a fairly small bet to show the system will work ; the final plan they give calls for a bet so large it will ruin . They run into trouble when demands to meet 's imaginary accomplice . has told the key to the scam is his friend at who gives him race results by phone before they 're released over the wire . The skeptical , however , wants proof . Pretending to be painters , the gang tricks a genuine manager into vacating his office for an hour , and one of them poses as the manager . is convinced . Meanwhile , 's goons have tracked to but failed to kill him . ( They -- and -- have no idea that the man is " helping " to is the same guy who helped take the runner 's money at the beginning of the movie . ) assigns the job to someone called , who , it 's implied , is a very skilled assassin . ( ) , a cop , has pursued to the big city because gave counterfeit cash when tried to shake him down . Snyder is n't getting very far ; when ca n't stay out of 's way entirely , he can outrun him . Snyder is induced to assist ( ) , who 's after . Snyder collars and brings him to , who pressures him to give up by threatening to lock up 's wife . , who was close to 's family , gives in , provided the will let the con run its course before arresting . The night before the final act of the , hooks up with ( ) , the new waitress at the diner where he likes to eat . When he wakes up , she 's gone . He 's somewhat puzzled to find that she has n't robbed him . He dresses , fits something we do n't get a good look at over his back teeth , and goes out . A man whom we 've seen only glimpses of before now is stalking with a gun . As walks down a sunlit alley and spots coming toward him , smiling , the armed man emerges behind him and shoots -- hitting neatly in the middle of the forehead . She drops a handgun as she falls . , stunned , listens to the gunman 's explanation that is " a pro " -- a hired killer -- and she had n't killed him the night before because witnesses had seen him entering her apartment . To 's bewildered " Who are you ? " , the gunman replies " asked me to look after you . , with half a million dollars in a suitcase , receives his tip in the drugstore and goes to 's gambling parlor to place the bet . The betting clerk needs 's approval to accept such a large bet ; there 's some taunting and snarling between and before accepts it . sits down to listen to the race . He 's joined by ( ) , the faux manager who 's been calling in 's tips . When mentions that he bet on the tipped horse to win , , shocked , tells him the bet should have been to place , not to win . In a panic , tries to rescind the wager , but it 's too late . While is shouting , the bursts in to arrest . Having secured the mastermind , his prize , tells he can go . throws a guilty look at and starts to slink away , but pulls a gun and shoots him in the back . Polk shoots . , standing nearby , can see that is bleeding from the mouth ; both men look quite dead . , whose job is to get away as quickly as possible , duly hustles him out , telling him he does n't want to be mixed up with dead bodies . is distraught , saying he left a half million dollars inside . Back in the gambling den , good cheer reigns . The dead have risen and are congratulating one another and their many accomplices -- including the erstwhile agents -- for a job well done . The set is already being disassembled ; tells the mobsters where to pick up their share of the take and he and leave > 

 < synopsis > ( ) , a quiet bespectacled boy wearing an old pilot 's cap and goggles , watches a film reel in a theater depicting his hero ( ) , a famous explorer . The reporter speaks of 's various accomplishments and discoveries before commenting that he was recently dishonored by scientists who believed his latest find , the large skeleton of a bird , was a hoax . Intent on proving them wrong , is seen boarding his zeppelin with his team of dogs and promises to return once he has brought back living proof of his find . After the show , runs down the street with his balloon , named after zeppelin The of . He passes an old , rundown house where he hears someone shout out 's famous slogan : Adventure is out goes inside to investigate and meets a young , outgoing tomboy who shares his passion for exploration and admiration of . Startled by her loud , boyish demeanor at first , loses his balloon in the rafters . The girl , ( ) , helps him retrieve it , though falls from a beam and breaks his arm . sneaks into his room that night and shows him her adventure book where she expresses a desire to one day move to the top of in , showing him a picture that she ' ripped right out of a library book ' . She makes him promise that they will go together someday before leaving . A musical montage shows and eventually getting married and moving into the old house where they first met . Their marriage is blissful and they get jobs as a balloon salesman and zookeeper , respectively . When they discover that is unable to have children , they make a pact to save money to travel to . However , as the years pass , they are forced to dig into their for other obligations . One day , an elderly realizes that , despite living happily together , they never fulfilled their old promise and decides to surprise on a picnic with tickets to . However , 's declining health puts her in the hospital and she eventually passes away , leaving alone . remains in his home , a retired and sour recluse , as the city grows around him . He is encouraged to move to a retirement home due to increased construction , but often argues with the foreman ( ) and refuses to leave . One day , he meets ( ) , a young wilderness explorer scout who attempts to assist in order to earn his ' assisting the elderly ' badge . tricks into ' assisting ' him by telling him to find and get rid of a ' snipe ' that invades his yard . When a construction worker accidentally breaks 's mailbox , a part of the house and a part of that cherishes , hits him over the head with his walker . The assault lands him in court where he is forced to move out of his home by the next day . Workers from retirement home arrive to pick him up the following morning but are shocked to find releasing millions of helium balloons into the air which detach his house from its foundation , lifting it over the city and into the sky . Comfortably away from the city , sets a course for and rests in his chair until he s interrupted by a knock at the door . Upon answering , he discovers hanging on to dear life on his porch ; apparently , had been snipe searching under porch . lets him in and decides to descend to return home before a severe storm hits . The house is knocked around in the turbulence but manages to tie most of his items down before falling asleep . He 's woken the next morning by , who tells him that they 're over ( thanks to a device that he accidentally throws out the window ) , though the ground is hidden by a dense fog . releases some balloons to descend but they hit ground early and are knocked out of the house . They manage to hold onto it using a hose attached to the porch while the fog lifts to reveal that they are standing on a high plateau opposite . Unable to climb back into the house , they resolve to walk to the falls before the helium in the balloons lets out . Meanwhile , a chase is progressing in the jungle . Three dogs with red lights on their collars are in hot pursuit of what appears to be a giant bird , but they lose the trail when their sensitive ears pick up the fine tuning of 's hearing aid . stops to go to the bathroom and happens upon a giant bird which he lures closer with a chocolate bar . He introduces the colorful creature to and gives it the name . follows them as they continue their journey but runs off when they approach the silhouette of a man who calls out to them . However , they see that the man is nothing more than a trick of the eye caused by overlapping stones . They are then approached by a golden retriever with a red light on his collar . tells him to sit and speak and is surprised when the dog answers , using the device on his collar . He tells them his name is ( ) and that he is a tracker looking for a bird , at which point tackles him . The foursome continue their journey , begrudging the additional company . At one point , loudly calls out and is answered by smaller calls . says that is calling to her babies and realizes that is a girl . Meanwhile , the three dogs seen chasing the bird earlier have picked up the scent of and , who they nickname the mailman . The leader ( ) , a doberman pinscher , tells ( ) , a rottweiler , and ( ) , a bulldog , that they must be vigilant and continue their search . His speaking device appears to be damaged , causing him to talk in a high pitch . Using the device on 's collar , Alpha calls to , who they 'd sent on a false mission in order to get rid of him , but finds him in the company of the bird they 'd been after . They soon track him down and come upon and , but has already run off . Instead , they choose to take and to their master . Entering a large gorge , and meet a large pack of dogs , all with high - tech collars on , before meeting their master -- who turns out to be none other than an elderly . invites them into The of as guests , but his behavior soon turns hostile when he finds out that has adopted a new pet bird . is shocked to see that has spent all the past years hunting for the bird which he was deemed a fraud for and has gone mad as a result . reveals a table of head mannequins wearing various headgear and grimly knocks each one off with his cane as he describes the stories their wearers told him ; claiming that each one was actually after his bird . and run away from the zeppelin just as discovers the bird calling out from the roof of 's home . Riding on 's back and assisted by , who calls his new master , they barely escape capture by 's dogs , though is injured in the process . agrees to help get back to her babies safely but , just before can re - enter her labyrinth home , a net flies out and captures her . and his dogs have arrived in the zeppelin , led to the spot by a tracking device on 's collar . throws a lantern beneath 's home , setting fire to it . ignores and runs over to extinguish the flames as takes on board and leaves . Angry and disheartened , yells at and tells that he 's taking his home to if it kills him . He manages to set his house down on the , but loses 's respect for leaving . goes inside the house and sits down to look at 's adventure book . Saddened that she never got to see the , he is about to close it when he discovers added pictures near the end , documenting their life together . On the last page is a note written by that says thanks for the adventure , now go have a new one ! and inspired , goes outside in time to see take off with a few balloons , using a leaf blower as propulsion . empties his home of extra furniture , allowing it to become airborne once again , and follows . He finds on his porch and happily exclaims that is his dog and he is his master . manages to sneak aboard 's zeppelin but is quickly caught and tied to a chair . sits him on the ships bomb - bay doors and flips the switch for them to open . flies in and manages to rescue in time , setting him inside the house while he goes into the zeppelin with to fetch . He s able to distract the guard dogs with a tennis ball from his walker and frees but is confronted by . They engage in a sword fight ( albeit uses his extended walker ) while , freed of his ties , fights off a squadron of dogs in fighter planes . He regains control of the house and returns to help , who has climbed to the top of the zeppelin with . has , meanwhile , faced off against and outsmarted him , effectively becoming the new alpha , and runs off to meet the others topside . , , and run for the house which has landed on the wing of the zeppelin , but appears with a rifle and shoots at them , causing the house to slip and dangle in the air . struggles to hold onto the house with the hose while goes in after . lures , carrying and , out of the house with chocolate and attempts to jump out of the window after them . He does n't make the jump as his foot gets caught in some balloon strings and , weighing too much for the balloons to support him , he falls to his death . As , , and make it back to the zeppelin , is forced to release his house , which slowly descends into the clouds , a loss which accepts as being for the best . is returned to her three chicks and takes and home where attends his senior explorer ceremony . When 's father fails to present him with his final badge , fulfills the role and gives a grape soda badge that gave him when they first met , calling it the badge . Afterwards , they sit on a curb together in front of an ice cream shop , acting as a surrogate grandfather to , The of anchored above them . At , and 's house has landed right at the spot where it was meant to be : on the cliff overlooking the falls.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > In the opening scene , ( ) desperately wants to leave with ( ) , her husband of 14 years , and their 11 - year - old daughter , ( ) . , however , is concerned for his elderly father ( - ) , who suffers from 's disease . Simin files for divorce , but the family court judges the couple 's problems insufficient to warrant divorce and rejects 's application . Simin moves back in with her parents but decides to stay with her father . Simin hires ( ) , a deeply religious woman from a poor suburb of , to take care of his father while he is at work . Her family is financially dependent on the job , and she takes her young daughter , ( ) , with her . quickly becomes overwhelmed by taking care of 's father , which is physically and emotionally demanding , especially as she is four months pregnant . One day , asks her daughter to help by taking the trash outside , but the bag bursts on the stairs . Razieh mops it up , but discovers that 's father has disappeared . Alarmed , runs down the street after him . The next day , and return to discover her grandfather lying unconscious on the floor in his bedroom , tied to the bed . and are nowhere to be found . When they return , accuses of neglecting his father and stealing money ( unbeknownst to both and , used the money to pay movers to move some of her furniture out of the apartment ) . When she refuses to leave until he pays her , he pushes out of the apartment . She falls on the stairwell outside . 's sister later calls to inform her that is in the hospital . and go to the hospital , where they encounter her husband , ( ) , and learn she has suffered a miscarriage . If it is proven that knew of 's pregnancy and caused the miscarriage , he could be sentenced for murder of an unborn infant . In front of a criminal judge , accuses of neglecting his father , while the hot - headed and aggressive physically confronts on several occasions . He yells at 's teacher ( ) , who was tutoring her at the apartment , after she gives a statement in support of , who she did n't think could hear the conversation they had when first arrived , in which discussed her pregnancy and recommended an / who does sonograms . When is arrested in the courtroom for another outburst , begs the judge , explaining that he has bipolar mental disorders and is taking medication . takes pity on her and asks the judge to not jail him . learns from that the reason was absent that day was because she had gone to visit a physician , which had avoided revealing earlier . and wonder if is physically abusive to and caused her miscarriage . Meanwhile , asks her father if he really did n't know was pregnant , because her mother thinks he did , and he says he did not , but that is trying to turn her against him . physically demonstrates to investigators that it is unlikely could have fallen where she did if he had pushed her out of the door , which angers more . shows up at 's school and harasses her and her teacher , accusing of lying under oath in court . Simin , fearing for 's safety , wants to pay restitution for the loss of their child to make the case go away . is initially outraged by 's suggestion and and both blame each other for the situation as their marriage continues to disintegrate . Termeh overhears leaving a voicemail for for the name of the / whose number she gave to the first day , and asks her father how he could have heard this if he claimed he did n't hear the conversation . He admits he did hear it but was forced to lie or spend up to three years in prison , and that he was concerned what would happen to her . also realizes he lied and withdraws her statement , telling the judge about his phone call . When the judge questions how he could known this , he claims his daughter told him . The judge tells to send Termeh into his office . hesitates , then sends her in without instructing her to lie for him . The judge is surprised that does n't know what he wants to ask her , meaning did not tell prepare her , and he believes her when she lies to protect her father . Simin tries to negotiate a settlement with . However , reveals to she has serious doubts as to whether 's actions caused the miscarriage , considering she had earlier been hit by a car while retrieving 's father when he had wandered out of the apartment and had first experienced symptoms of the miscarriage that night . Razieh fears that without the money can provide in or out of court will not be able to pay back his debtors , destroying their family . After another full - blown argument , forces to leave with her . agrees to the payment and asks to swear on the that he is the cause of her miscarriage . Since she has doubts , she refuses , though tries to force her to avoid dishonor in front of his creditors , and begins hitting himself over and over in rage . Later in the final scene , at the family court , and have filed for a divorce once again . The judge makes their separation permanent , and asks which parent she chooses to live with . She states that she has made a decision , but asks that the judge tell her parents to wait outside before she tells him.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis>(This is the synopsis of the full 150 minute version)PROLOGUEThe film is set in the year 2026 , in the extraordinary skyscrapers of a corporate city - state , the of the title . Society has been divided into two rigid groups : one of rich planners or thinkers , who live in luxury on the surface of in the lush skyscrapers ; the other of workers , who live underground , toiling to sustain the lives of the privileged up above . Entire shifts of employees are walking into large factories on a daily basis , relieving a batch of severely overworked colleagues who are brought down to the workers ' city in large elevators . The sons of the privileged rich families spend much of their leisure time in the of , an exclusive pleasure garden where their every need is tended to . ( ) , the son of city ' ' ( ) , is being presented with female consorts , when the beautiful and evangelical figure ( ) enters the garden with a large group of workers ' children . She showcases them the lush lifestyle of the rich in contrast to their own poverty , and reminds the children that these are their " brothers " , before she and the children are dismissed . becomes infatuated with , and follows her down into the working underworld . In the underworld , he experiences firsthand the toiling lifestyle of the workers and the casual attitude of their employers . He observes how an extremely overworked man inadvertently causes an explosion at the " - Machine " , seeing how the employers bring in new workers to keep the machine running before taking care of the men wounded or killed in the accident . He even starts to hallucinate , seeing the - as the Biblical that workers are ritualistically sacrificed to . Shocked at what he sees , he proceeds to his father 's office . is conducting his business with his assistant ( ) when enters , and tells him about the incident . reprimands for the incident , but seems more concerned with the fact that he had to hear it from his son rather than his assistant . is appalled by how workers are treated , but his father defends this status quo as normal . Then ( ) , the guardian of the - machine comes in . He shows papers containing an unknown schematic that they keep finding on the person of wounded workers . Again , is dismayed that he has to learn this from someone else and not , and proceeds to fire the latter . Freder leaves , and orders his henchman known as the ( ) to follow , and send updates on his son 's whereabouts . follows the dismissed and narrowly saves him from killing himself . He asks for 's help and receives his home address . gets back to the factory and trades places and clothing with an overworked man called 11811 ( ) . He gives 's address and tells him to go there . The has followed to the factory , and does not realize that it is who has now taken 's place . While driving to 's address in 's private car , is handed an advertisement for the pleasure district , and proceeds to go there , followed by the . Later , 's father consults with the scientist ( - ) , an old companion and rival . lives in an ancient cottage between the skyscrapers , and is in the process of building a robotic gynoid . wants to give the robot the appearance of , his former lover who left him for and died giving birth to . Joh has come to for information about the papers found on dead workers . At the same time , himself learns that the paper schematic kept by the workers is , in fact , a map to a secret meeting place in the city 's catacombs , and he is invited by a colleague to join after shift is over . He follows the workers , as informs of the same . gives access to the catacombs from his basement . is surprised to find , who has taken up the cause of the workers , as and are observing her from a separate cave . gives a passionate sermon where she tells of the of , a work that was started by man in order to get to the heavens , like . As the story goes , the work was never finished because gave all the workers a different language , meaning they could no longer talk to each other ; but according to , the language problem was simply an allegory for the people being of different social positions , planners and workers who could not effectively communicate and cooperate together . She advises the desperate workers not to start a revolution , and instead wait for the arrival of " " , who , she says , will unite the two halves of society : the " heart " that will mediate between the " mind " ( the rich planners ) and the " hands " ( the poor workers ) . identifies himself as this , declaring his love for . She tells him to meet in the cathedral the next day . realizes that 's son is the , but purposely does n't tell him . Joh persuades to give the robot 's appearance , as he wants to use the robot to tighten his control over the workers . complies , but hides his ulterior motives : he knows of 's and 's love , and wants to use the robot to pit against his son in revenge over losing to him . As soon as leaves , proceeds to chase and abducts her to his house . INTERMEZZOThe next day , attends a sermon in the cathedral , where he learns of the signs of the . He has a vision in the form of a woman dressed like the whore of , supported by the images of the seven deadly sins around her , which frighten him . He returns to 's home , but around the same time , the has finally accosted . He beats him into giving up 's address , and places Georgy back into the factory . goes to 's apartment , and since is not there , he tells that he will go in search of . As he leaves , the comes and threatens . finalizes his android design , and gives it the outer appearance of . The real is screaming , which is heard by as he walks past 's house . He enters but manages to trap him inside his basement . He send the fake to 's house in , and releases , telling him is with his father . Joh instructs the fake to undo all the work that her prototype has done . When arrives home , he finds his father and fake in an embrace , and the shock causes him to go into a delirium . During an extended period full of hallucinations about , the fake one is showcased in the presence of and as an exotic dancer in the upper city 's nightclub : her harlot appearance is exactly as in 's vision of the , unleashing death and the seven sins as she causes discord among the rich young men of , sending them into wild acts of debauchery and murder . END OF INTERMEZZOIn the meanwhile , wakes from his delirium and is informed by of what his father 's spy is doing to , setting young men up against each other . finds it impossible to believe this is the same angelic he knows . The reports to , who instructs him to let the workers do whatever they plan to do , as part of his big plan to let the workers start to revolt , so he can legally use violence to quell their uprising . , on the other hand , tells the captive ( real ) how the fake is central to his plan to deceive , leading him to believe that fake is doing his bidding , while the robot is actually loyal to him only . and go searching for , descending to the worker 's city , where they find claiming their precious has not come , and encouraging the workers into a full - scale rebellion ; calls her out to be a fake , which causes a fight with the other workers . One of them attacks him with a knife , but an escaped intervenes , sacrificing his life by taking the stab . The workers and fake leave for the elevators in order to destroy the - that keeps them enslaved . However , in their zeal , they forget about their children who are all still in the workers ' quarters . is eavesdropping on and real , learning that is deceiving him , planning to have the factory destroyed and killed . Joh fights with and beats him unconscious before leaving , setting free in the process . The angry mob of workers manage to break into the power station of the city . In a final attempt , , the foreman of the - , closes a set of giant doors to stop them . Joh returns to his office , getting the message from that thousands of angry workers have broken in . Still thinking he can use this to his advantage , orders to open the doors , over protests that the - keeps water out of the city . Workers and the fake pour into the - and manage to get it to stop working , over 's protests . As the machine is destroyed , the city 's reservoirs start to overflow , flooding the workers ' underground city and seemingly drowning the children left behind in the riot . The Thin Man informs that is among the workers , telling him that he will be responsible for thousands of deaths , including his own son . and finally find the real , and together they arrive in time to sound the alarm . They rally the children and manage to heroically evacuate them to safety above , taking them to the of . When the workers have finally come to their senses , gets them to realize the damage they have done , and that their children are lost . In anger , they attack the upper city , while fake tells the rich people in to go to the streets and watch the workers destroy themselves . , in the meanwhile , wakes up , now completely insane and setting out to retrieve his robot in order to re - shape her as his lost lover . Under the leadership of , the workers start looking for the , whom they hold responsible for their riot and their children 's death . They find her and give chase , despite her attempts to inform them of the fake . As they break into the city 's entertainment district , they run into the crowd and inadvertently capture the robot , while the human manages to escape in the cathedral . The workers burn the captured at the stake . Meanwhile , the human is now chased by along the battlements of the city 's cathedral . despairs when he sees at the stake , but then he and the workers realize that she is in fact a robot . He sees chasing the real on the cathedral , and chases after them . While informs a relieved and the workers that their children are safe , watches in terror as his son struggles with on the cathedral 's roof . finally gets the upper hand , and falls to his death . and return to the street , where unites and , fulfilling his role as the " " . The final text BETWEEN AND HANDS MUST BE THE HEART!</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) goes to a taxi depot where he applies for a job as a driver to the tough - talking personnel officer ( ) . claims that he is an honorably discharged ( it is implied that he is a ) . After making an impression on the personnel officer , gets the job for the night shift due to his chronic insomnia . Via his narrative journal , is soon revealed to be a lonely and depressed young man of 26 years . His origins and hometown are unknown . He sends his parents letters as well as birthday and cards , lying about his life and saying he works with the . spends his restless days alone in his rundown apartment somewhere in , or in seedy porn theaters on and off . At one porn theater he tries to make an advance on the concession lady to no avail . He works 12 or 14 hour shifts during the evening and night time hours carrying passengers among all five boroughs of . Sometimes during his breaks , he goes to a local all - night diner to have something to eat or just a few cups of coffee where fellow taxi drivers also hang out during their late - night lunch breaks . One of whom is a self - appointed philosophical type named ( ) . Wizard talks about the degradation of the night time in the city . barely interacts with the other taxi drivers , mainly speaking awkwardly and shyly when he 's spoken to . During taxi driving , spies and becomes infatuated with a woman named ( ) , a campaign volunteer for , who is running for the presidential nomination and is promising dramatic social change . spies joking with a co - worker named ( ) . works up the nerve to ask her out and is initially intrigued by . She agrees to a date with him after he flirts with her over coffee and sympathizes with her own apparent loneliness . She compares him to a character in the song " The , Chapter 33."Travis is further revolted by what he considers the moral decay around him . One night while on shift , ( ) , a 12 - year - old child prostitute , gets in his cab , attempting to escape her pimp . Shocked by the occurrence fails to drive off quickly enough and her pimp , " " ( ) , reaches the cab . forcibly grabs away with him and gives a crumpled twenty dollar bill as a bribe not to say anything , which haunts with the memory of his failure to help the girl . During one of his shifts , picks up himself ( ) and an aide . He tells the senator he plans to vote for him and the senator , acting like a real politician , tells he learns more from cab drivers than drivers . The senator asks " What 's the one thing that bugs you the most ? " and responds that he would like the next president to " clean the scum off . "On their date , however due to his lack of social skills , takes to a porno theater to view a hardcore Swedish " sex education " film ( titled : Language of ) . Offended , she leaves him and takes a taxi home alone . The next day he tries to reconcile with , phoning her and sending her flowers , but all of his attempts are in vain and she refuses to speak with him . Going back into the campaign office , confronts and shouts that she will " burn in hell like the rest of them . "Rejected and depressed , later picks up a man ( director ) who appears to be as mentally unbalanced as he is . The man tells to park outside an apartment building while letting the meter run . He tells to look at the woman in the window and tells him that 's his wife in her boyfriend 's apartment . He tells he plans to kill them both with a .44 . One evening at the diner , approaches and tries to express his despair to , but when makes a half - hearted response to ' problems with the teen prostitute and others , angrily responds with : " that 's just about the stupidest thing I ever heard . 's thoughts turn more violent . Disgusted by the petty street crime ( especially prostitution ) that he witnesses while driving through the city , he now finds a focus for his frustration and buys a number of pistols from an illegal drug / weapons dealer ( develops an ominously intense interest in 's public appearances and it seems that he somehow blames the presidential hopeful for his own failure at wooing and maybe hopes to include her boss in his growing list of targets . Back at his apartment with his newly purchased guns , he begins a program of intense physical training and practices a menacing speech in the mirror , while pulling out a pistol that he attached to a home - made sliding action holster on his right arm ( " You talkin ' to me ? " ) . Later , he hangs around a rally and asks a suspicious man about joining the service before disappearing into the crowd . In an accidental warm - up , randomly walks into a robbery in a run - down grocery store and shoots the would - be thief ( ) in the face ; adding to the bizarre violence , the sympathetic grocery owner ( ) encourages ( who has no permit for his guns ) to flee the scene and then proceeds to club the near - dead stickup man to death with a steel pole . Later , seeing on the street , he follows her . Another day later , asks to pay for her time , and is sent to . A tense conversation ensues but sends up to 's room . Once in her room , does not have sex with her and instead tries to convince her to leave this way of life behind . The next day , and meet for breakfast at a local coffee shop and becomes obsessed with saving this naive child - woman who thinks hanging out with hookers , pimps and drug dealers is more " hip " than dating young boys and going to school . considers 's offer but then seduces and convinces her to stay , while ( seemingly ) spies into the window from his cab . writes a note to including all his money and stating that he does n't intend to survive . Any lingering doubt in the viewer 's mind about 's sanity is obliterated when he is suddenly and shockingly shown to be sporting a crude haircut at a public rally . He creeps through the crowd and prepares to assassinate but is spotted by men and flees . returns to his apartment to collect all his guns , then drives to " " ( an area of 's side consisting of Avenues through E ) . He walks up to and confronts him . When flicks a lit cigarette at him , says " suck on this " and shoots in the belly . Storming into the brothel , blows the bouncer 's hand off . , who has followed , grazes neck with a bullet ( causing an arterial gush from his neck ) but unloads one of his guns into , killing him . again shoots the screaming bouncer who follows him up the stairs , slapping him . ' mafioso customer shoots in the arm and shoots his face off . The bouncer tackles but stabs him through the hand and finally kills the bouncer with a bullet to the brain . He then calmly tries repeatedly to fire a bullet into his own head under his chin but all the weapons are empty so he resigns himself to resting on a convenient sofa until police arrive . When they do , the blood - soaked mimes shooting himself in the head and then blissfully thinks of the mayhem and carnage in his wake . A brief epilogue shows recuperating from the incident . He has received a handwritten letter from ' parents who thank him for saving their daughter , and the media ( in newspaper clipping ) hails him as a hero for saving her as well . blithely returns to his job and suddenly seems on more friendly terms with the other cabbies . One night one of his fares happens to be . She comments about his saving of and ' own media fame , yet denies being any sort of hero . He drops her off without charging her . As he is driving off , he gets a strange look on his face and adjusts his cab 's rear view mirror , giving the impression that his irrationality is about to break through > 

 < synopsis > An opening montage , narrated by ( ) , publisher of " - , " a sleaze magazine , explains that has taken over the organized crime rackets in ( left behind by the murdered ) and that his actions have tarnished the reputation of the police department . , however , is arrested on income tax evasion and sent to prison on in state , leaving open the rackets he 'd expanded for years . " Remember dear readers , " he signs off , " You heard it here first . On the record , off the , and very - . "During the season of 1952 , police officer " " ( ) , while out on a liquor run with his partner , , checks in on a parolee he 'd sent to and finds him physically abusing his wife . has no tolerance for those who are violent with women , seeing how his own mother was killed by his drunk and abusive father . To lure the wifebeater outside , the man 's lighted sleigh and reindeer decorations from the roof of the house . When the man comes outside to confront , beats him senseless and handcuffs him to the porch railing . tells the man he 'll be sent back to prison for about 18 months and that he 'll be watching him after he 's released , threatening to send him back on a child rape charge . and go to a liquor store where they buy alcohol for a party at their precinct . meets a beautiful woman in the store named , who easily recognizes that he is a cop . Leaving the store , notices a young woman , whose face is bruised and bandaged , sitting in the backseat of a car with another unidentified man . When inquires about what happened , he is met by the car 's driver , ' ' , who tries to shine him on . disarms him and inquires further about the injured woman , who tells him herself that she 's OK . He returns ' pistol and wallet . When he gets back to his own car , confirms that is a former cop . At a lavish party for the show of , . ( ) , a narcotics detective , is dancing with his date when he is met by . Vincennes is a technical advisor to the show 's lead actor , teaching him how to act like a cop . He 's also got a hustle going on with where he busts celebrities for minor offenses and then writes trashy gossip to ruin their careers in - . Tonight , has a hot tip for : two starlets , and , have purchased a small quantity of and have rented a hotel bungalow . Sid promises Vincennes a $ 50 payment for doing the bust , in exchange for exclusive coverage in - , though Vincennes ups the demand to $ 100 to cover the additional payoffs for two patrolmen and a watch commander . At a local police precinct , . ' ' ( ) has been assigned as watch commander for the evening . He is interviewed by a reporter from the , who cite his late father 's own famous reputation as a police officer , suggesting that has a lot to live up to . also talks to his captain , ( ) , who expresses disappointment in the young officer and warns that unless he 's willing to adopt the brutal tactics ( planting evidence , interrogative beatings ) employed by officers like his father , he 'll never be a successful detective in the department . Exley intends to build his career as an honest cop , even if that means being a pariah with the rank and file cops . As a last word of advice , urges not to wear his glasses because nobody else on the force wears them . Vincennes busts and and arrests them in a gaudy show that headlines as the " " ( due to Vincennes directing to take the article picture from such an angle so as to capture a movie theatre premiere going on in the background ) . While Vincennes is investigating the bungalow , he pockets the small amount of marijuana that the two brought and is intrigued to find a business card for an agency called " de " . He takes them to 's police station and has them booked for possession of . refuses the $ 10 bribe offers him , a reply that perplexes Vincennes . At that moment , three Mexican suspects are brought in ; it is believed they assaulted two police officers , who came out of the incident with minor injuries . The details of the incident quickly become hyperbolic as gossip spreads . Vincennes himself contributes to the escalation and the drunk party goers are lead to believe both officers are near death in the hospital . and some of the other other party goers , already heavily intoxicated , rush downstairs to the holding area . Refusing to recognize 's authority as watch commander , the scene quickly becomes ugly as the Mexican prisoners are viciously beaten . is locked in the isolation room when he tries to intervene . tries to pull off one of the prisoners and calm him down only to get provoked into the attack when insulted by one of them . Vincennes joins in as well when a prisoner falls on him , bloodying his fancy suit . The reporters who 'd been interviewing are also present , snapping a photo of the fight . The photo of the makes the front page of The , describing the incident as " Bloody " , sparking public outrage and demand for the responsible parties to be held accountable . The , and meet with , and separately . White staunchly refuses to rat on as the ringleader of the incident and is ordered suspended without pay . Exley is more cooperative , knowing that his own testimony will secure him a promotion to lieutenant and detective level , agrees to appear in court as a surprise witness , and also shows political acumen that even could n't imagine : the public will not be happy if the police bury this scandal , so the blame should be shifted to participants who 've already secured their pensions and can be convinced to take early retirements , while indicting and as the ones who purchased the liquor for the party . agrees , and the immediately has promoted to ( noting parallels between 's rise and that of his father ) on the spot . However , and note that 's testimony will be worthless unless they can produce another witness . For this , suggests Vincennes , figuring he can be compelled to testify with the threat of losing his technical advisor role on of . The officials invite to observe as Vincennes meets with them and they lay out 's deal . Vincennes agrees and accepts a transfer to the vice department following a temporary suspension , though is quick to figure out that is the star witness . Within days , the fallout from the scandal blows over : is fired so the police have a scapegoat who can take all the blame for the incident , while several other officers are forced into early retirement . Exley moves up to downtown , and is immediately despised by his fellow colleagues . is taken off suspension when he agrees to aid , and detectives and in a new project , in which they intercept mobsters who intend to move into and take over 's businesses . The suspects are taken to a remote and abandoned motel complex called the and are beaten by and threatened into leaving the city . While this goes on , several former lieutenants are gunned down by two - man teams armed with submachine guns in what the media speculate to be a power struggle to gain control of the void left by 's imprisonment . In one incident , 's top heroin dealer is murdered in his house and 20 kilograms of product is stolen by the unidentified killers . Vincennes is temporarily suspended , per his deal with the DA , and upon his reinstatement is assigned to a task force looking to break up prostitution rings around the city . He 's intrigued when he notices a symbol of a flower on the dossier he 's given and recognizes it as the logo from the business card he found in ' bungalow . However , his attempt to contact them over the phone is unsuccessful . On his first night in , shortly after 2:00 AM , gets a call about a murder at the coffee shop , a regular hangout for cops . arrives on the scene and finds the cook shot dead behind the counter , and the cash register emptied , suggesting a robbery . He notices an overturned chair and realizes there were several customers inside . He then notices a blood trail that leads to the men 's bathroom . Following this trail , he finds five more bodies piled up in the bathroom , all riddled with shotgun blasts . arrives and assumes command of the investigation , making his second in command . The forensics team quickly reports that there were six victims . The shooters are determined to have fired fifteen rounds , which suggests three shotguns with five - shot capacity and three gunmen . It also turns out that one of the deceased has been identified as . rushes to the hospital to look at the body . Crestfallen to see his friend among the dead ( especially considering that he 'd only spoken to him a few hours earlier in the parking garage after he 'd surrendered his badge and gun ) , he demands the story from who fills him in . He and then sit in as another of the victims , , is identified by her mother . When he sees her body , immediately recognizes as the woman in the car who appeared to be injured the night he and were purchasing the liquor . Putting aside all other investigations , the senior detectives from all departments are assigned to the search and apprehension of the killers . Much to the consternation of his fellow detectives , himself will lead the interrogations of the suspects when they are brought in . Leads are few but a report of three " negro " males firing shotguns , driving a late 1940s , will be followed by all the two - man teams involved . is shaken by the fact that two of the victims - and - crossed paths so shortly before the killings . Acting on his hunches , he strikes out on his own to follow this lead , refusing to be partnered . He returns to the liquor store where he met , and upon asking the owner , is given the address of a man named ( ) , the man sitting next to the night he met her and . Bud talks to and finds out that the woman he met in the liquor store , ( ) , and are part of a prostitution ring run by himself that uses plastic surgery to give his women the appearance of famous movie stars . The prostitution ring is dubbed " de " , which unbeknownst to is the ring that has been looking into . is 's while was his . However , refuses to divulge any details about ' murder and cuts the meeting short . joins Vincennes on a hunch and they turn up the address of , who drives the car mentioned in the lead . They track the man and his two friends to their home and find the car and shotguns in a garage . They also find and have beaten them to it . Vincennes argues briefly with the two other officers about who will arrest the three men ; and had gotten there first and knows the arrest will get him back in with the narcotics squad . Exley pulls rank and orders them to all proceed together and and his buddies , , and , are arrested without much incident , although has to deflect 's shotgun to keep him from shooting one of the suspects . During the questioning of the suspects and tactfully using the interrogation room 's speakers and microphones , demonstrates brilliant tactical skill , tricking the three men into believing they have informed on each other . The three already have criminal records and have spent time in juvenile facilities , which also uses to his advantage . One of them , crying and nearly hysterical , tells that they 'd visited the house of another man , , so he could lose his virginity to a woman held captive there . , rushes into ' room and , drawing his pistol and emptying every chamber in the cylinder but one , he puts the muzzle in the man 's mouth and plays Russian , demanding Fitch 's address , which gives up . A team is sent out to 's house . White sneaks in first , finding a young Mexican woman bound naked to a bed and obviously beaten , and possibly raped . finds watching TV , and shoots him dead , before planting a fired pistol on him . When the victim is driven away in an ambulance , tries to ask her when the three black men left her but stops him , waving the ambulance away . seems angered that is only concerned about furthering his career , which counters by saying that " got what he deserved " and 's fate will be the same . White tries to attack but is held back . At that moment a report is issued that the three black suspects have escaped from the precinct . Exley , talking to a stenographer , gets an address that was given by one of the black men where they had bought drugs . Unable to get Vincennes , takes with him to the address and they burst in to find the three suspects there with their narcotics supplier , . When accidentally knocks a bottle off the table , the trigger - happy shoots him . All hell breaks loose as lethally shoots multiple times , until shoots him . attempts to grab a revolver , but he is also shot dead by . tries to flee to the elevator , but jams his shotgun in just as the door is about to close and takes him out as well . Exley is greeted as a hero back at the station and dubs him " . " With the case closed , is given the department 's highest decoration , the of , for bravery in the line of duty , and earns the respect of the other detectives in the department who previously despised him . Vincennes returns to the squad and the " of " TV show . In the meantime , breaks ground on an ambitious project , a freeway running from the eastern sections of to the beaches of , one he is heavily invested in . To do so , he has blackmailed a councilman into approving the project with some compromising photos showing him cavorting with . eventually begins a romantic relationship with and continues his work with , beating mobsters at the . The work soon begins to burn out , and his affair with gradually softens his vicious demeanor . One day , during a campaign rally on the set of " of " , Vincennes is approached by with another job : is deliberately setting up in a blackmail scheme by arranging a sexual encounter with ( the same young actor arrested by himself at ) both of whom will be busted by Vincennes . Vincennes tries to ask if has any knowledge about 's prostitution ring , but is still not of help as is n't the sort of person he could ruin with a scandal . While knocking off drinks at a bar and looking at the $ 50 bill gave him , Vincennes begins to develop uneasiness about setting up and the He decides he 'll let the young actor off the hook , and goes to the motel ahead of the scheduled photo shoot to talk to . Instead , to his shock , someone has broken into ' room and cut his throat . However , becomes suspicious of many of the details surrounding the Nite Owl murders and talks to the coroner . The files from the case are still in the doctor 's lab . Studying a picture of the seating area , notices a spot of blood on the wall next to one of the tables , as if one of the victims was knocked out before being dragged into the men 's bathroom . The doctor notes that that stain was 's blood . The food on the table , and a lipstick mark on the coffee cup opposite 's place , indicate to that had been there with a woman ( White remembers said he was going on a date that night , and concludes that he may have had a girlfriend ) . The coroner also informs that the other female victim aside from the waitress was named . 's suspicion is confirmed when he visits ' distraught mother and she identifies from a photograph , a man she disapproved of . She also tells that had previously been seen with another man carrying a large bundle into her backyard . When notices that has a towel placed at the bottom of a door leading to her back sun room to block a strong unpleasant stench , he checks out the crawlspace under the house and finds a badly rotted corpse . He finds a wallet in the dead man 's coat . Much to his shock , the body is that of , 's former chauffeur and the man had first seen outside the liquor store at . deliberately leaves the body behind for someone else to find and tells ' mother that the stench is a big " rat " , giving her the money in ' wallet . Back at the station , begins to have second thoughts about the case as well while wheeling , the suspects ' rape victim out of the hospital to be paraded before the press . mentions being unsure as to what time the Nite suspects left her . This leads him to the coroner had spoken to earlier . follows 's lead to ' home and finds ' remains . He has the body taken to the , demanding a rapid identity on the body and that the coroner share it with no one else , then goes to Vincennes and asks for his help in investigating further details about the case . Exley convinces Vincennes by sharing the story of how his father was killed by a random mugger , whom was never identified , but whom has named " " to give him a personality . Vincennes agrees to help if will help him solve 's murder . Vincennes tails to the where catches up with 's former enforcer , and finds out ( after roughly squeezing the man 's crotch ) that had come into a large supply of heroin . concludes that was murdered for it . Vincennes and next see at 's house . Vincennes remembers " de " & realizes that is one of 's prostitutes , and pay a visit to get some answers for Vincennes ' case . As they 're leaving , a call comes in telling them that ' body has been ID'd . Exley sends Vincennes to get the news while pays a call to . Refusing to answer the lieutenant 's questions , she seduces him while photographs them both from behind a one - way mirror . Vincennes , going through old records , finds a connection between , , and . He goes to 's house to inquire about the work that Meeks and did for on some cases they worked twelve years earlier . What is n't aware of is that is in fact that Nite Owl ringleader , something he only realizes when suddenly produces a pistol and shoots him after he admits that he 's not yet confided this lead to . Remembering what confided in him about his father 's killer , he has one last thing to say to before he expires : " . announces the next day that the department will suspend all other cases until 's killer is found . He talks directly to about the only lead : 's last words , suspecting that is n't a placeholder name but an actual person Vincennes is acquainted with . Exley manages to keep a straight face as he realizes that could only know that name if he was the one who shot Vincennes . He lies and says he knows nothing of the name . then meets with and criticizes him for what he deems a lack of enthusiasm concerning his job . He also tells that they 'll be going to the to interrogate the man he believes last saw Vincennes alive . It turns out to be . asks him a few questions which do n't provide much information . However , during the beating administered by himself , talks about how uses his women for blackmail . He mentions that he 's photographed a cop having sex with . becomes enraged , thinking that spied on him . He turns ' chair over and rushes out to the reporter 's car . In the trunk , he finds pictures , not of himself with , but of with . becomes further enraged and drives off . Meanwhile , and suffocate over his protests that he was part of a " team " with them . Exley checks with records keeping for arrest warrant books on and finds nothing . When he checks the daily log books he finds that had signed off on nearly all of ' and 's work for many years and realizes the connection between them is prominent . White visits 's house , furiously and jealously demanding to know about her tryst with . When she tries to calm him down , he hits her , bruising her face . White leaves in a fury . finds in the records room at the station and viciously attacks him after showing him the photo of he and together . Exley manages to fight off and realizes that intended for to find the pictures so he would be provoked into killing , giving leverage over . The two stop their battle and begin to review everything they 've each uncovered about the conspiracy : , , , , the missing heroin are all linked . now realizes that the black men that were charged with the Owl attack were set up : when he and showed up , and were already there and had planted the shotguns , and were going to kill the three men so that no questions would be asked if they were caught resisting arrest . In order to piece it all together , the two agree to work as partners , even at the expense of 's reputation for solving the Nite Owl murder case , which built his career . They go to 's office and demand wiretaps for . refuses and further refuses to divulge any information about ' murder and dismisses them , stepping into his office bathroom . White shoves the 's head into the toilet and dangles him out the window . caves and tells him that was killed because he was present when he and argued over the assumption of the drug - dealing rackets . was allowed to live because of his influence and because he promised not to prosecute them . and agree that their next stop is 's house . When they arrive there , they find that they 're too late , as or someone working for him has slit 's wrists and made it look like a suicide . Believing that had some knowledge of 's plan , they arrange to have her taken to a nearby police station for safety . Exley goes there and talks to her , saying feels great remorse for beating her . goes to ' office and finds that has dumped his body there , but the detectives note it 'll be hard to pin it on anybody given the number of people dug up trash on for - . While there , he receives a call telling him to meet at the . At the , the two find that the calls were planted to get them together in a vulnerable location . They hold up in the same cabin where was murdered . 's men approach the cabin and and open fire ; a fierce gunfight ensues . They eventually kill all of 's men , however they are confronted by himself , who shoots , forcing him to fall . turns his gun on a cornered , who says " " . asks who the man is , tells him it 's himself , merely because he 's a man who can evade the law . hears approaching police cars and tells to walk out with him , promising to further the younger man 's career . He also tells to show his badge . Exley shoots in the back and walks out , holding his badge as instructed . Sitting in one of the same interview rooms he used to interrogate the three black men , explains the intricate connections in the case . The and are incredulous but realize the department 's reputation for upholding the law will be threatened . While floating the solution of glorifying with 's help , they spot beaming . When the asks him why , he says they 'll need more than one hero . In the final scene , is once again presented with the of . He spots and walks out with her . In her car is , bandaged and recovering from his wounds . says they 're going to her hometown of , . and shakes hands and drives off , waving slightly to Exley.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > , a detective with the , arrives in to attempt a reunion and reconciliation with his estranged wife ( ) , who is attending a party thrown by her employer , the , at its still - unfinished American branch office headquarters , the high - rise . is met at the airport by , a limo driver charged with taking to 's office . quickly deduces that has come to to patch things up with and offers to park the limo in the building 's garage for a short time until figures out his accommodations . As he enters the lobby , he finds that the building 's staff directory is an automated computer program listing under her maiden name , . When he gets off the elevator on the 30th floor , he sees a lavish holiday party is underway . is met by 's boss , , a genial Japanese businessman . After refreshes himself from the flight in 's corporate bathroom , they have an argument over the use of her maiden name but is called away . As the party continues , a large moving van from " " makes its way to the building . Two men , ( ) and ( ) , arrive in a car at the front entrance to the building . At the security desk they divert the security guards ' attention away from the trucks . Karl guns down the guards while commandeers the closed circuit security field and locks down all the elevators except for the service car . Terrorists led by the slick and well - mannered German anarchist ( ) emerge from the trucks and hold the partygoers as hostages in exchange for terrorist operatives in prison . In the confusion , is able to disappear unnoticed into the building 's maintenance areas but forgets to take his shoes along , leaving him barefoot . is taken from the party to the building 's conference room and learns that is actually using the hostage situation as a cover to steal $ 640 million in bearer bonds stored in the building 's vault . , having made his way to the anteroom outside the conference room , is unable to stop from executing when he refuses to give him the vault 's combination . McClane attempts to alert the local police by setting off a fire alarm -- his attempt fails when has one of his men cancel the alarm and he is promptly discovered by 's brother , . kills , taking his gun and radio , but finds the man 's boots are too small . McClane places 's corpse in the only elevator left operational and hides on top of the car . ' men discover in the elevator with an elf 's hat on his head and a message written in on his sweatshirt that reads " NOW I HAVE A ; - - " . While angrily talks the situation over with his men , writes down as many details about them as he can including some of their names and how many voices he hears . is enraged and wants to leave immediately to find but stops him , saying that they need time for to penetrate the outer locks of the vault and for the police to arrive . makes it to the roof and tries to call the LAPD on 's walkie - talkie . Overheard by and his men , he sends to the roof to hunt down . While argues with the over his distress call -- they believe it to be a prank -- and two of ' men attack , forcing to retreat into the tower 's ventilation system . When he emerges , he tries to get the attention of ( ) , sent by the dispatcher had contacted before . When and find him in the conference room , narrowly kills them both . Initially finding nothing amiss , is ready to drive off but , in a desperate move before his last hope for outside help leaves , gets his attention by throwing 's corpse out of the window and onto 's patrol vehicle . Another detachment of 's men opens fire on 's car as he reverses out of the front circle and crashes , frantically calling for backup in his panicky state . While searching 's pockets and bag , finds the henchman was carrying a significant quantity of explosive and detonators . McClane taunts using 's walkie - talkie and tells him he killed a few of his men , giving their names . reports to that was n't bluffing and that their adversary took 's bag , which presumably held all the detonators . With now fully convinced that the emergency call was real , the situation rapidly escalates as the comes in force and surrounds the with a large force . However , is not too concerned : although the police responded somewhat sooner than he planned thanks to 's interference , the police are a necessary and unwitting part of 's plan . As part of that plan , contacts the police with a list of difficult demands such as the release of various real terrorists he has no connection with and has only read about in the news to stall them . After he finishes with his bogus demands , gives the order to hunt down . Meanwhile , the team , led by ( ) arrives to storm the building . However , monitors their movements on the security feed and alerts . Talking furiously to , attempts to stop the team from walking into a trap , but can not convince or the chief . The team is repelled , the armoured vehicle is disabled by a rocket launcher , and the police are out - gunned by the firepower of the terrorists and their strategic spots in the building . To stop two of 's men from continuing to fire rockets upon the disabled armored car , drops down the elevator shaft and blows out the entire floor where the terrorists are planted , giving the cops a chance to retreat . By this time the news media are on the scene , led by sleazy reporter ( ) , and the , led by ( ) and his partner , ( ) arrive to commandeer the situation . As they make their plans to shut down and his crew , discovers who really is and that his wife lives in the area . He goes to 's house and , after threatening 's housekeeper with deportation , interviews the children on live the remainder of 's men attempt to find and the detonators , one of the hostages , ( ) , believing he can negotiate with , betrays 's identity , claiming they 're old friends . suddenly breaks into a conversation between and , telling he knows who he is , and demands that his adversary return the detonators or else he will kill . refuses to surrender , pleading with to stop their dialog because does n't understand the predicament he 's put himself in . kills , to the horror of the police who have been listening in . continues to keep moving through the building to learn more about 's plans . and accidentally meet but gains 's trust by passing himself off as an escaped hostage . McClane hands his pistol and tells him to stay close while they look for a way out of the building . then contacts his henchmen while pointing the pistol at . When he pulls the trigger , it clicks on an empty chamber . scoffs at 's attempt to kill him just as 's men arrive , opening fire immediately and pinning down in a room full of computer terminals and glass - walled offices . suddenly gets an idea to shoot out all the glass in the room , making it treacherous for to find a way out while he 's barefoot . McClane flees anyway , dropping the bag containing the detonators . happily retrieves the bag however is still furious that got away . A few minutes later , while hiding in a nearby men 's room , talks to while removing a large piece of glass embedded in his foot . asks about his past and reveals that he has n't had the nerve to draw his pistol in the line of duty in several years because he shot a young boy who pointed a toy pistol at him . McClane\\nwraps his foot in his tank top and tells to contact after the ordeal is over and let her know he loves her . tells to hang in and that his fellow officers even have a betting pool going on him . sets out for the roof , curious as to why was snooping around there when he found him . The two overzealous agents play their final card by shutting off the building 's power while they plan a helicopter raid onto the roof . However , had planned for the 's predictability - disconnecting the power has shut down the final electromagnetic lock on the vault and given him access to the bonds . , inspecting the top level , finds out has used the recovered detonators to rig the helipad on the building 's roof with explosives . plans to demand helicopters to carry himself , his men and the hostages to a waiting plane at an airport . After the informs that his demands have been met , 's men force the hostages to the roof to be killed by the explosions , so they can escape in the confusion . , after fighting off and failing to warn the police of the 's doublecross , is able to get the hostages back inside safely , but the helicopter shoots at him , believing he 's one of the terrorists . The helipad explodes , the helicopter is destroyed and both Johnsons are killed . escapes again by jumping from the roof with a fire hose tied around his waist . He shoots out a window a few stories down and swings himself inside to safety . has discovered from 's newscast that is 's wife . He holds her hostage to prevent from interfering in his getaway . , down to his last two bullets , is able to lull into a trap ; he surrenders with his pistol taped to his back . He draws quickly , killing the last remaining henchman , , and shoots through the chest , who falls backwards and out of the building through a window . manages to hang onto 's wristwatch , his weight dragging her out the window as well . is able to unstrap the watch and lets fall to his death . Meanwhile , is knocked unconscious by , while preparing their getaway vehicle , an ambulance , in the parking garage . and leave the building together , and meet for the first time . , posing as an injured survivor , bursts out behind and with his assault rifle , but draws and shoots him before he can harm and . attempts to interview them as they are leaving the scene , punches him in the face for broadcasting his interview with their kids . and leave in 's limo as the building is secured by the police.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The film opens as we see boxing promoter ( ) and his naive partner ( ) , sitting nervously before an unseen man , in . Turkish gives a brief narration about the circumstances , then the movie really takes off . We then jump to , where gangster and compulsive gambler ( ) and his buddies , dressed like rabbis , pull off a daring robbery and nab an 86 - karat diamond ( throughout the rest of the film , it 's either 86 - karat or 84 - karat , depending on which character states it , or it loses value after going through so many hands ) . One of 's men is the brother of ex - KGB gangster the ( ) , aka the - , named due to his unique ability to defy death . is now in the business of selling guns on the blackmarket , and lures to buy a gun , in order to steal the diamond . Meanwhile , has contacted jewelry retailer the ( ) about the diamond . lives in the Jewish community of , although he himself is not even Jewish . Nevertheless , contacts his ( ) in about the diamond . sounds very interested , and tells to keep close and interested in selling . At the same time , and are preparing for a big bout , using their premier boxer , . is being overprotective these days , and carries a small firearm that he bought from the . Turkish and run a legitimate slot machine business on the side , to compensate for the illegal boxing that they participate in , and their office is a run - down caravan . Turkish is unimpressed by doing deals in such a crappy environment , so he urges to go buy a new caravan from a traveling band of gypsies ( or pikies , as everyone else calls them ) . goes to the campsite , accompanied by . It 's there that they meet One ( ) , a tough , indecipherable part - time pugilist . buys the caravan , but as he and are leaving , the wheels of the caravan almost immediately fall off . asks for the money back , but refuses . demands the money back , and starts throwing his weight around , decides that he and fight for it . They have a bare - knuckle brawl , and while is still removing his hat and shirt , starts throwing punches . He beats up for awhile , until lays just one punch into , knocking him out cold . reports back to about the bad news regarding , but tells about 's mean left cross . With out of commission , Turkish is in dutch with debt to . is very pissed that is not going to fight , due to all the bets that were placed on him . Turkish , desperate , turns to , who says he 'll do the fight if Turkish buys his mother a new caravan . is not too impressed by this change in the cast , but allows to fight in place of , granted that will take the dive in the fourth round . During his meeting with , the convinces the gambler to go place a bet on the fights that night . is interested , and does so . To get the diamond , hires inept pawnbrokers , ( ) and ( ) , to rob the bookie and steal the briefcase ( containing the diamond ) from . gets the briefcase ( its contents unknown to and ) and the pawnbrokers get the cash , roughly 10,000 pounds . and enlist a getaway driver named ( ) , a man so large he has trouble getting out of the car . Also along for the ride is a dog that found . The dog is very restless , always chewing and biting things , and even swallows its squeaky toy , making it squeak whenever it barks . parks his van in front of the bookie 's , and goes to the back to change . Just then , the pawnbrokers crash into his van , knocking out cold . The pawnrokers stakeout the bookie 's , until it 's time . Meanwhile , Turkish is very nervous about the fight , and urges continuously to go down in the fourth . just nods . When the fight begins , throws the first punch , and knocks the other fighter out cold . Now , and are in big trouble . is not very happy . and finally decide to rob the bookie 's . When they enter the building and draw their guns , the girl working the counter immediately hits the alarm , closing off all of the windows and doors , trapping and inside . is actually trapped in the closed window , half of his body hanging out . blows a hole in the wall with his shotgun , and tells the girl to lower the window so can get free . She does , falls to the ground , and tells the girl to hand over the money . She says there is no money , since all bets are off . There 's only a few coins . When accidentally places his shotgun down for a second , the girl grabs it , fires at them , and closes the window . fires his pistol at the door trying to break the glass , but the bullet ricochets , hitting in the leg . Both men take off their masks , only to see the security camera looking straight at them . Suddenly , Tyrone pushes the door open , and the three run back to the car . As they are preparing to leave , they see , now awake , exiting his van . Tyrone walks up to him and knocks him out cold with the butt of his pistol . He tries taking the briefcase , but it 's attached to 's arm , so puts 's unconscious body in the car with him and the pawnbrokers . Back in , is hounding the about the whereabouts of . says he 's looking , but ca n't find him . Actually , is n't looking , and knows this , so he flies to himself . Avi reems out about not finding the diamond , and sets his sights on getting it himself . At the pawnshop , , and have tied to a chair , a sack over his head . the enters , and asks why they brought with them , instead of just cutting off his arm and taking the briefcase . tells there was no money at the bookie , so compensates them with the 10,000 pounds in cash upfront . declines , saying that he and his pals are more interested in the diamond . They opened the case , and found the stone , and demand half of whatever it 's worth . explains that whatever is in the briefcase is his , but wo n't listen and walks away . , angry but cool about it , pulls out his gun , and shoots in the head . The pawnbrokers are now scared out of their wits . demands the diamond , but the pawnbrokers had put it back in the briefcase and only knew the combination . , getting very agitated , pulls out a meat cleaver , and hacks off 's arm . He takes the briefcase , with the arm still attached , and tells the pawnbrokers they can keep the 10,000 pounds , as well as the body . It 's now their problem . Turkish returns home , and finds with two of his goons waiting for him . explains that Turkish is in deep trouble , however , was impressed by 's style , and tells that he wants to use the gypsy in a bare - knuckle fight coming up , with still going down in the fourth . Turkish agrees , and leaves , but not until taking most of 's money to compensate for 's stubborness . Now , wants to know who tried to hit the bookie , so he and his goons watch the security tape . They do n't recognize and , but one of the goons recognizes when he opened the door . Turkish and venture back out to the campsites , and find and his friends " coursing " , a game that involves hungry dogs chasing a hare . Turkish asks to fight in the bare - knuckle brawl . tells the promoters that he still wants the caravan for his mother , but he 'll place a bet about his conditions of fighting . If the hare gets away , has to pay up , but if the dogs capture the hare , will fight for free . They let the hare go , and the dogs chase after it . This scene is intercut with 's goons locating , chasing and capturing , putting him in a hole with angry dogs . Tyrone tells everything about the robbery . At the same time , the hare , after some close calls , escapes with its life . Turkish has to look into getting the caravan . On the drive back to town , tries to test out the gun that sold to him , but it 's defective and wo n't fire . , growing very upset with , decides to hire a troubleshooter by the name of Bullet - ( ) , who , as legend has it , took six bullets in one sitting , and survived . agrees to work for , and the two , along with 's sidekick , , go to get information . grabs a named ( , " Spud " from " Trainspotting " ) off the street , traps his head in the car window , and drives down the street , with running along side the car , until spills the beans , and reveals to them about the pawnbrokers . Back at the pawnshop , and are trying to dispose of 's body , when suddenly walks in . He explains to them the best way to dispose of the body is to feed the flesh to pigs . That 's his method , anyways . leads them to their outer office , where a group of goons wait , with bodybags , butcher knives , etc . , basically preparing for the pawnbrokers ' demise . , in desperation , tells about the diamond , and says that he and can get it for him in four days . agrees , but gives them 48 hours instead . Turkish tells the demands regarding the upcoming bout . He says that 's mother wants a new caravan . is very pissed that would have the balls to demand things of him , so he decides to put his message across . Some goons smash up 's slot machines . Turkish knocks two of them out , but they eventually nab him , and are about to cut off his arm , when walks in , with his defective gun , and gets him and Turkish out of there . also wants to make clear to about his point , so he burns down 's mother 's caravan ... with his mother inside . Mickey tries to save her , but his friends hold him back , as the flames grow higher . and go over to the pawnbrokers , where reveals , with 's gun to his head , that it was all the 's idea . is surprised to hear this name , and tells about . While they are waiting at the 's jewelry shop , they see enter on the security camera . says he 'll take care of . The next cut shows , and in the car , all a little beaten up . They got , though , and put him in their trunk , with a little difficulty . They go over to ' house , and get the diamond . The pawnbrokers do n't have any guns , but they purchase some replicas with extra loud blanks to get back the diamond from . They 're tipped off by that he found , but he was n't alone . That 's when the bizarre car montage begins ... The pawnbrokers are following and when suddenly they hit someone standing in the street . Turkish and are driving along in their , and is explaining why it 's bad for Turkish to drink milk . grabs the milk , and tosses it out of the window , only to hear a crash . is driving and , and says that he wants to kill . suggests shooting him . says it 's too loud . suggests stabbing . says it 's too cold - blooded . says they should stab him , and tells to pull out a blade from under the seat . Rosebud pulls out a large sword , when suddenly ... a carton of milk splashes onto the windshield , causing to crash . and are fine , but is dead , the sword sticking out of him . looks across the street and sees , tied up with a sack over his head , walking around , until suddenly hit , by the pawnbroker 's car . Turkish and are now at ' , with ready to demand his money back for the defective gun . Suddenly , , still very much alive and angry , walks by them . Tommy tries to talk to him , but racks him . walks inside his house , and grabs a large assault rifle , like the one in " . and , trying to keep it cool , go into a nearby pub to clean up . goes to the bathroom with the diamond . goes to the bar , and orders a pint . The pawnbrokers walk in , in masks with their replicas , and point them at , who is very calm . They demand to know where the diamond is , but says that they 're not going to get anywhere with those guns , considering they have " replica " written down the side of them . draws their attention to his gun , which has .50 written down the side of it . The pawnbrokers leave , but while they are in the hall , opens the bathroom door . The pawnbrokers point their replicas at , and demand the diamond . says they 're going to have to shoot him . Suddenly , enters , with his assault rifle , and he 's about to shoot everyone . is in the other room , but can hear everything . He finds the hall door is locked , and yells for to grab his socks ( " get down ! " ) . and the pawnbrokers drop to the ground , as fires round after round through the wall , hitting . and get up , grab the case , and run , leaving Tyrone behind . walks into the hallway , reloads , and shoots a few more times . But is still alive . It takes the entire round , and a shot to the head to finally kill the - . also tries to shoot , but the gun is empty . and , now that they have the diamond , are about to give it to , when suddenly appears . hides the diamond in his pants , and tells to tell and it 's back at the pawnshop . They all go back to the pawnshop . 's dog has torn the place up , shredding papers and defecating on the floor . tells to open a window . says the diamond is missing , the dog must have eaten it . tells to open the dog up , but resists . There 's a lot of commotion , and finally hands the diamond over to . admires the diamond , but the dog suddenly jumps up and grabs the diamond with its mouth . is very angry now , and grabs 's gun and starts firing everywhere . The dog jumps out of the open window . tells to follow him , but is n't going anywhere . realizes that he just accidently killed . This sends back to . During 's wake , gets very , very drunk . Turkish and wake him up , and get him ready for the fight . tells the gypsy to do as he says , considering there 's a handful of men waiting at the campground , armed and awaiting 's instructions to kill the other gypsies , should disobey him . once again must go down in the fourth . Turkish yells at not to knock the other fighter out . The bout begins , and once again opens with his mean left cross , knocking the other fighter down , but not out . The fight really starts , and the two are merely trading licks . is not fighting like he normally does , and is soon taking a beating . Finally , in the fourth round , after taking some mighty hits , is knocked hard to the ground . As he hits the ground , the floor of the mat suddenly turns into water , and is swimming underwater , looking above to see himself lying down with the other fighter above him . All has to do now is stay down . However , swims back up into his body , and , with one swift punch , knocks the other fighter out cold . rushes outside . He wants to shoot , and as they are leaving . calls one of his men on his cell phone , and hears gunfire . He hangs up , and as , , and are getting to their car , knocks on the window of his car , and demands that his goon give him a gun . Suddenly , there 's a shot . We then retrace back , with 's narration , that was expecting the ambush on the campsite . The other gypsies surround 's men , and blow them away . When called one of his men , 's buddy answers , and says that is going to speak up if his friend wants to hear him . 's friend then shoots 's man . The gypsies are also waiting in 's car , and when demands a gun , one of the gypsies roll down the window , and shoots in the face . takes off with the gypsies , leaving Turkish and a bit confused . The next day , and go to the campsite , to find it abandoned . The gypsies left in the middle of the night . Some police officers arrive , and ask what he 's doing there . Suddenly , Turkish spots 's dog , and tells the officer he was walking his dog . grabs the dog , and he and leave , only to pass by and by their car on the side of the road , being questioned by cops why they have a dead man missing his arm in their trunk . Turkish goes on to explain that wanted to keep the dog , but Turkish made it go to the vet , to stop the squeaking . While at the vet , they discovered the diamond , and now we are back to the first scene of the film , with Turkish and sitting nervously across from an unseen man . Turkish is inquiring about the diamond , and the camera does a quick dolly to reveal the , who says he might know someone interested in it . We cut back to see boarding a plane for London.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The story opens in , , in 1912 . A troop of are exploring the area . One of the , , finds a cave where where a party led by a mercenary wearing a fedora and leather jacket finds the cross of , a priceless Spanish American artifact . , believing it belongs in a museum , takes it and is pursued , attempting to escape by horseback . He is followed by the mercenaries in autos , but boards a circus train to elude them . While on the train , he crawls through a car full of snakes ( thereby providing the backstory for his ophidiophobia ) and then finds himself in a car with a lion , from whom he escapes by using a bullwhip he finds hanging on the wall , in which his first attempt backlashes and gives him a cut on his chin ( explaining the origin of his scar , a real scar borne by actor ) . After a few more dangerous encounters , including a near castration by the horn of a rhinoceros annoyed by the tussle on his roof , escapes the train through a magician 's magic box and takes the cross home , where his father is busy working on drawing that looks like a stained glass window . When excitedly tries to tell his father about it , his father rebuffs him , telling him to calm down by counting to 10 in . Moments later a fellow scout whom had sent for the when he discovered the illegal dig returns with the sheriff ; but he is dismayed to find that the burly businessman wearing a panama hat who had hired the mercenaries had also bought the law , and is forced to surrender the cross to the looters . However , before the head mercenary leaves the house , he says to " You lost this time , , but you do n't have to like it",and puts the fedora on the boy 's head . As smiles the scene fades and the scene changes to 1938 aboard a freighter in a violent Atlantic storm . has tracked down the cross , but is again confronted by the man in the hat and his henchmen . He grabs the artifact , fights off the crew and dives into the ocean scant seconds before a massive wave collapses the ship 's funnel , causing it to fall onto a load of explosives . As grabs a life preserver from the wreck , he sees the hat sinking nearby . As the hulk of the ship sinks , the name is visible on the bow : . Indy returns to his university and after a moment of comic relief almost identical to the similar scene in " of the " gives the artifact to for the museum , then goes to his office , where he is surrounded by a phalanx of students . His secretary gives him a ream of papers to be graded as well as phone messages and a brown paper package from , which he absently stuffs in his pocket . After sitting for a moment in his artifact cluttered office , he sneaks out through his window but is greeted by three men who step from a sinister black sedan . They ask him to accompany them to an elegant penthouse apartment . He meets , a generous donor to the museum . is apparently an oil magnate whose drilling team has uncovered fragment of a stone marker dating to the 12th century near , . The marker is read by , and to his surprise it details " the cup that holds the blood of " - the , whose waters can grant immortality . 's project leader has deduced that a second marker , left behind by a knight who had found the , is somewhere in , but a major snag has occurred , as the project leader and all his research have vanished , to the concern of his assistant , . To 's surprise , his father is 's project leader , and when and find 's house ransacked and his mail opened , suddenly remembers the package he got from - his dad 's diary , in which is contained all his father 's research on the . and fly to , where has arranged apartments for them , and they meet with . She gives them a written note by that contains only the Roman numerals for three , seven , and ten . The group goes to where disappeared , the library , which was once a church in ancient Roman times . A stained - glass window dating from the sacking of gives a clue that the library is the tomb of the knight . Indy pries open the floor and finds a network of tunnels containing oil . Exploring the tunnel with - and in the process passing a wall painting of ancient antiquities such as The Of The - finds an ancient casket and a knight 's shield , the second marker . However , is slugged by members of a cult sworn to preventing discovery of the ; the cult sets fire to the oil in the tunnels but and escape through the city sewers . and are pursued by the cultists on speedboats before dispatches one boat and corners the group 's leader , a member of the of the , descendants of soldiers sworn to protect the grail with their lives . Indy learns from him that his father is a prisoner in the castle near German - Austrian border . Later , after drying out , Indy arranges for to meet to begin finding the while he and go after . He finds that his room and 's have been ransacked by men looking for the diary , making him all the more determined to find and also the . The two fly to the German castle and finds , but both are double crossed by , and to both men 's horror they find that the string - puller in this whole affair is , who wants the ancient cup to give him immortality . and are bound in the castle but manages to break out , in the process setting off a fire . He and commandeer a motorcycle and escape pursuing German soldiers , but stops 's trek of escape to make him go back to , where and have taken his diary for . When demands to know why the diary is so important , explains that it details traps that protect the grail and keys to defeating them . also confronts his father about his obsession with the grail and receives a slap from his father when he blasphemes . and his father trek to , find standing with and his highest staff at a party book burning . retrieves the diary , in the process tempted to strangle her . During his departure from the rally , comes face - to - face with himself , who adds his signature to the book . and his father go to the to escape . Indy books tickets aboard a dirigible . However , they are forced to leave the dirigible using the search plane attached underneath . They are chased by fighters and are forced to land when 's father shoots the tail off their own plane with its machine gun . They steal a car and escape one plane that crashes into a tunnel , but a second one drops a bomb that destroys their car . " suddenly remembers my " that drives him to send seagulls flying into the path of the second fighter , which flies into the swarm and crashes . Reaching the desert area of , and rendezvous with 's pal , where they learn that , whom had given a map from the diary leading them to the itself , was captured by agents and taken to . Tracking down 's exploration group , , , and see it is escorted by a company of troopers with a - vintage tank . When desert guerrillas led by the group that attacked in ambush the convoy , uses the cover to try and rescue , but both are seized by the . pursues the tank and a prolonged fight ensues where and attack the soldiers inside and by a mixture of clumsiness and force succeed in killing them , then use the tank to blast the convoy . rescues the two of them but the tank drives off a sheer cliff , barely escaping . The four men soon track down 's remaining group at a temple carved in a cliff ( ) in which is the path to the . The traps within have already killed several of 's group , and when and his pals are seized , sees as his chance . To force to find the , shoots , leaving the healing power of the as the only chance to save 's life . Indy thus enters the dangerous pathway , deducing how to avoid its traps and finding the chamber of the . He succeeds in reaching the grail chamber where one of the original knight brothers still lives and must choose the correct grail from many false ones . However , and enter before he can , and chooses a cup for . She knows it is an incorrect choice , and ultimately ages to death for drinking from the wrong grail . Indy then picks the true grail , drinks from it proving it to be the true one and is warned by the knight that the grail can not be taken beyond the great seal in the outer chamber thus forcing those who wish to use immortality provided by it to remain in the takes the grail and uses it to heal 's wound . All is settled until decides to leave with the grail , setting off a mammoth quake inside the vast temple . Elsa hits the ground and the grail rolls into a large fissure in the temple . Elsa almost falls in herself , but is saved by at the last moment . Elsa , instead of letting lift her up , pulls one of her hands free to try and reach the grail resting below her . She can almost touch it , and so she keeps on reaching , despite 's pleads to give him both her hands . He can not maintain his grip on 's slippery leather gloved hand , and before can grasp the cup , her hand slips out of its leather glove . Elsa falls to her death and near does too , but his father catches him . tries to reach the grail himself , but gets through to him and the two ultimately escape the temple . When calls " " asks what it means . tells him 's full name " , " a moniker that himself detests . also reveals that " " was the name of their dog when was a child . finds the revelation very funny . Led by a victory cry from the inept , the four then ride off on horseback into the > 

 < synopsis > The film tells the story of , an unemployed man in the depressed post - World economy of . With no money and a wife and two children to support , he is desperate for work . He is delighted to at last get a good job hanging up posters , but on the sole condition that he has a bicycle which must be used for work . He is told unequivocally : " No bicycle , no job . " His wife pawns their bedsheets in order to get money to redeem his bicycle from the pawnbroker . Early on in the film , 's coveted bicycle is stolen by a bold young thief who snatches it when he is hanging up a poster . thinks that the police will take the theft very seriously , but they are not really interested in the petty theft of a bike . The only option is for and his friends to walk the streets of themselves , looking for the bicycle . After trying for hours with no luck , they finally give up and leave . Desperate for leads and with his better judgement clouded , even visits the dubious backstreet fortune teller that he had earlier mocked , in the hope that she may be able to shed light upon the bike 's whereabouts . However , she merely doles out to him one of the truisms that form her stock in trade : " you 'll find the bike quickly , or not at all . " Feeling cheated , a crestfallen hands over to her some of the last money that they have . After a rare treat of a meal in a restaurant , admits to his son that if he is n't able to work , they will simply starve . finally manages to locate the thief ( who , it seems , had already sold the bicycle ) and slips off to summon the police to the apartment . meanwhile , angrily accuses the thief of stealing his bike but the boy denies all knowledge of the crime . When the policeman arrives , he sees the accused boy lying on the floor feigning a seizure and surrounded by irate neighbours who blame 's accusations for causing the " innocent " boy 's fit . The policeman tells that although he may have seen the boy stealing the bike , he did not catch the thief red - handed , nor has he any witnesses and that making an accusation is not good enough . With no proof and with the thief 's neighbours willing to give him a false alibi , he abandons his cause . walks away from the house in despair , as the thief 's neighbours follow , jeering at him about his lost bicycle . At the end of the film in one of the most resonant scenes , is sitting on the curb outside the packed football stadium . He looks at the hundreds and hundreds of bicycles that are parked outside the stadium and as he cradles his head in despair , a fleet of bicycles mockingly speeds past him . After vacillating for some time about whether to steal one for himself , he decides he has no other option but to snatch one that he spots outside an apartment . Unluckily , he is seen taking the bike and caught by a crowd of angry men who slap and humiliate him in front of his son . Ironically , this time with an army of witnesses who catch him , he is frogmarched off to the police station but after seeing how upset is , the owner of the bicycle declines to press charges . The film ends with the man and his son , sad and let down from what has just happened , they walk along in a crowd , leaving us with a dim outlook for the two . Holding hands , they are both reduced to tears.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) is an eight - year - old whose world is filled with wonders that no one else seems to appreciate ; colors , fish , dogs and kites are just not important in the world of adults , who are much more interested in things like homework , marks and neatness . And just can not seem to get anything right in class . When he gets into far more trouble than his parents can handle , he is packed off to a boarding school to be disciplined . Things are no different at his new school , and has to contend with the added trauma of separation from his family . One day a new art teacher bursts onto the scene , ( ) , who infects the students with joy and optimism . He breaks all the rules of how things are done by asking them to think , dream and imagine , and all the children respond with enthusiasm , all except . soon realizes that is very unhappy , and he sets out to discover why . With time , patience and care , he ultimately helps find himself.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > On 6 1917 , aerial reconnaissance has observed that the German army , which has pulled back from a sector of the in northern , is not in retreat but has made a strategic withdrawal to the new , where they are waiting to overwhelm the with artillery . In the British trenches , with field telephone lines cut , two young British soldiers , , a veteran of the , and , are ordered by to carry a message to of the of the , calling off a scheduled attack that would jeopardise the lives of 1,600 men , including 's brother . and cross no man 's land to reach the abandoned German trenches . In an underground barracks , they discover a booby - trap tripwire , which is promptly triggered by a rat . The explosion almost kills , but saves him , and the two escape . They arrive at an abandoned farmhouse , where they witness a German plane being shot down . and drag the burned pilot from the plane . However , the pilot stabs and is shot dead by . Schofield comforts as he dies , promising to complete the mission and to write to 's mother . is then picked up by a passing British unit . A destroyed canal bridge near - - prevents the British lorries from crossing . Schofield chooses to part with them at the bridge , but before he does , one of the unit 's officers , warns that is someone who would rather fight than follow orders . He then uses what is left of the bridge to cross alone , and quickly comes under fire from a German sniper . He and the sniper shoot each other simultaneously ; the sniper is killed , while is knocked unconscious . He regains consciousness at night , and finds the town in flames . He is discovered by German soldiers , who open fire . escapes the soldiers by hiding in the basement of an abandoned building , and stumbles into the hiding place of a French woman with an infant . She treats his wounds , and he comforts the infant by reciting a poem , giving the woman his canned food and milk from the farm . Despite her pleas , leaves soon after , realising that time is not on his side . He encounters more German soldiers , strangling one and pushing past another who is inebriated . Being chased , he escapes by jumping into a river . He is swept over a waterfall before reaching the riverbank by morning . In the forest , he finds of the , which is in the last wave of the attack . As the company starts to move toward the front , tries to reach . Realising that the trenches are too crowded for him to make it to in time , sprints across the battlefield , just as the infantry begins its charge . He forces his way into meeting , who reads the message and reluctantly calls off the attack . says that , while the cancellation offers a temporary reprieve , command will likely change its orders in a week . is told that was in the first wave , and he searches for him among the wounded , finding him unscathed . is upset to hear of his brother 's death , but thanks Schofield for his efforts . gives his brother 's rings and dog tag , and asks to write to their mother about 's heroics , to which agrees . sits under a tree , looking at photographs of his wife and two daughters.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The film starts out with a short clip from a documentary where the real life speaks about how even though she feels like she should be angry with her younger self for becoming Hitlers secretary , it is very hard to forgive herself . The narrative begins in of 1942 . and four other young women are arriving at 's 's in , . The women are met by 's valet , . After he gives the women an introduction , emerges from his office and proceeds to individually ask each woman her name and where she is from . is the first woman chosen to have her secretarial skills tested and is eventually chosen to be personal secretary . The story jumps ahead to 20th , 1945 , 's fifty - sixth birthday . In , inside the , is awakened by the bombardment of Soviet artillery from above . A furious storms out of his office and asks his Generals to inform him where the gunfire is coming from . informs that is currently under fire from Soviet artillery , but he does n't know where its coming from . gives a phone connected to who informs that the artillery battery is only twelve kilometers away . After finding out the are much closer than he was told , yells at his Generals for not informing him and that he had to find out this news for himself . Above ground in the , many head figures gather for Hitlers birthday reception . At the party , informs that is ordering the evacuation of all German military offices by initiating . says that will take the whole down if he remains in . He suggests that speak to his sister - in - law , , to see if she can convince to leave the city . Soon after , enters the room and is greeted with a salute and " " from everyone . The film jumps over to the evacuation of the . It also introduces a parallel story surrounding - G\\xc3\\xbcnter , an SS colonel and doctor still in . Upset by the orders to evacuate , argues with that because he is both a colonel for the and a doctor for the , he should not be ordered to evacuate so that he can stay to take care of the sick . finally agrees and issues an authorized permit to stay in . Back in the , many of the remaining generals are giving their final goodbyes to . When says goodbye , he begs to leave and suggests getting in touch with the , but refuses and leaves . As the generals are getting into their cars to evacuate , tells that he thinks has finally lost it and that since will fall in the next few days , he is going to have to take it in his own hands . At the same time , arrives at the to talk with . Overlooking a model for the proposed " " , praises Speer on his genius for realizing what will become once they win the war . and speak up urging to leave the city before it is too late , but he refuses again . Speer backs him up by telling that he must be on stage when the curtain falls . The film cuts away to the streets of and the civilians trying to leave before the capture the city . Another parallel story is introduced surrounding a boy named and his small outfit of soldiers manning a 88 . An older man , who is missing his left arm , walks up to the group of kids and is identified as father . He tells and his fellow soldiers that they are to young to fight and to stop . After several minutes of arguing , the group of soldiers tells that they will fight until the very end because they swore an oath to The F\\xc3\\xbchrer . calls his father a coward and runs away . In his war room , refuses the plea from to begin the retreat of the 9th . states that will be able to counterattack the once his men arrive in . He also orders to defend the city at all costs . Mohnke requests the evacuation of civilians , but refuses . Outside of the war room , many of the generals express their concern that is going crazy , stating that he is ordering army divisions that only exist on the map . makes his way up to the surface to present awards to the which happens to include . Back in the bunker , and some of the other girls discuss how they ca n't abandon like so many other people are doing . Back in his office , tells about his scorched earth plan and that he wants to systematically destroy important industrial parts of the city before the allies arrive . Begging for the mercy of the German people , tells him it will only do harm to the future of , but states that the only German people left are the weak and that they deserve to die . Meanwhile , up in the , and many other guests are having a party . grabs aside and begs her to convince to leave , but she refuses . Off to the side , tells her friend that the whole situation is unreal and is like a bad dream . The whole party suddenly comes to an end when an artillery shell hits right outside the building , sending debris through the windows . Everyone descends back down into the bunker . Up on the streets , is being accused for not holding his post and for retreating . Even though he denies the accusations , he is ordered to report to the bunker for execution . Back in the , receives a call from Mohnke ordering him to collect all the medical supplies he can find and to bring them to the bunker . arrives at the bunker as he was ordered to , asking why he is to be shot . informs him that orders are that any general who retreats is to be shot on spot . After Weildling tells him that he has n't moved at all , informs him to speak with about it . arrives at a military hospital to get the requested medical supplies , but it has been abandoned and cleaned out except for dead bodies . also discovers a group of elderly and sick patients who have been left for dead . Back in the bunker , informs that his report has impressed and not only will he no longer be shot , but that he has been promoted to the commander of 's defense . Weidling states that he would rather have been shot . On the other side of the bunker , pleads to and to leave and informs them that what has told them about a possible victory is false . In the war room , informs that the have pushed the German lines even further into the city and that was n't able to gather enough soldiers for a counterattack . orders everyone leave except , , and . yells at them for disobeying a direct order and that his entire military has been lying to him . states all of his generals are cowards and traitors and that because of their incompetence , they have lost him the war . leaves the war room and tells that she can leave if she wants , but she refuses to . The rest of the remaining generals argue over what to do now that has given up . , and talk a walk just outside the entrance of the bunker to grab a smoke . Eva talks about how she hates 's , , and abuses the dog whenever is not around . Bombs start to fall again and they retreat inside the bunker . On his way back to the bunker with medical supplies , runs into a group of soldiers about to execute a small group of old men for not helping defend the city . Schenck pleads to the soldiers to spare the old mens ' lives , but they are shot anyway . Schenck leaves and finally arrives at the bunker with the supplies and is shocked to see how many wounded civilians are there . Meanwhile , ' wife and six children arrive at the bunker to stay with him under the care of . The children dress up and present a song to . After the children leave , discusses the best ways to commit suicide with , and , giving them each a cyanide capsule . Now 23rd , and each write letters to their families informing them that the war is almost over and that they plan on staying with until the end . Meanwhile , orders to link up with to capture more oilfields for offensive maneuvers once they push back the . receives a message from stating that he wishes to take command of the since can no longer do anything from . After declaring G\\xc3\\xb6ring a failure and a traitor , he orders him to be executed . Meanwhile , arrives at the bunker and pleads with and to reconsider staying with . Speer meets with to say his goodbyes . He also begs that spare the German people and not take everyone down with him , but once again , refuses . Speer then informs that he has personally ignored and even defied many of his orders for some time . Upset , rejects a handshake and tells to leave . , who has left his unit and been fleeing from the approaching , is able to make it to his home to find his father and mother waiting for him . During dinner , appoints as the in of the with order to reorganize and correct the mistakes that have been made . He tells that he must be ruthless because compassion is for the weak and a betrayal of natural selection . During this dinner , receives a report that has offered 's surrender to the western allies . Upset that his most loyal general has betrayed him , orders to be executed and for to report to the bunker to be promoted in place of . has a meeting with - who is requesting to leave so that he and his family can escape , but is denied . After is dismissed , informs that has left the bunker and can not be found , upsetting even more . Meanwhile , at home , kills himself along with his entire family and is executed for treason once he is found . Back in the war room , is informed that the have advanced even further and that no longer has any air support , stopping any more supplies from reaching the remaining army . However , still has hope that will be able to rescue . After leaves the room , the remaining generals discuss that lacks the manpower to do anything to the , but they can not surrender . then reports to so that she can write his last will . states that since , all of his thoughts and actions have been dictated by his love and loyalty to the German people . As is typing it up , informs her that has ordered him to leave , but he can not do it and will need her to write up his will too . Meanwhile , then has a small ceremony where he marries . Later on , is informed that neither nor any other army division will be able to rescue . tells them that he can not surrender and that neither can any of his generals . informs that he and will commit suicide and that he is to make sure that the will never be able to find his body . and are ordered to the bunker where gives instructions on how to commit suicide . Meanwhile , is forced to wait with a bunch of drunken soldiers who have given up any hope of victory , but later witnesses giving a cyanide capsule . Meanwhile , and talk about the approaching end . Eva gives one of her best fur coats and makes her promise to try and make it out of the bunker alive . then has his last meal with and a few others , and then informs them that the time has come . He gathers around and his remaining friends , including the , to wish them goodbye . attempts one last time to convince to leave , but he refuses , stating that millions of people will curse him tomorrow . and retire to their room and commit suicide . then informs the remaining generals that is indeed dead and his and 's bodies are carried to the surface where they are doused with gasoline and burned . has a meeting with the Russian generals informing them that is dead and that will not accept unconditional surrender . However , the Russian generals tell him that they must . Later on , gives all of her children a sedative and poisons them while they are asleep . She and her husband commit suicide not long after , along with and . orders the to cease fire . , along with a few other women , is able to make it out of the bunker dressed as soldiers . informs the women that they do n't have to be taken prisoner because the are n't looking for them . is joined by , who is now orphaned after his parents committed suicide , and the two of them are able to pass through the Russian army . Some of the remaining soldiers , along with , are hiding from the in a building . When they finally hear the news that has officially surrender , the majority of them commit suicide in order to remain loyal to , but is able to make it out of there alive . After getting through the , and find a bicycle and escape from . The film ends by revealing the fates of each individual after the war . The last clip is the real life talking about how even though she was n't aware of the extent of the concentration and extermination camps until after the war , she still feels like being young is n't an excuse and that it would have been possible for her to find things out.\\nProf . - was played ny who will later display in ( 2008).</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > story is said by the voice of ( / ) the nephew of . The movie plot is based on the . The story revolves in a small village named , , in . The movie starts with ( ) watching an Olympic game for in his office . TV is broadcasting that 's role in wrestling is very poor . A new employee joined at the office challenges to wrestle and loses . also works part time at a local wrestling ring ( ) and he is very talented in terms of wrestling and it 's technique . He could n't took part in and win gold therefor he has hopes very high that his future son will win gold for country . His wife ( ) supports him morally but they keep on having child only back - to - back four times in a row . Being ( / ) , ( / ) , and . Finally , loses all hope and he locks away all his wrestling equipment and medal in a trunk . After 13 - 14 years , one day a neighbor family having two son age 13 - 14 years comes at 's house to complain about their sons being beaten up by and . asks them how and beat the two boys and the girls happily demonstrate on their cousin . 's eyes sparkle by that his daughters have a wrestler 's blood and he tells his wife that a medal is ultimately a Gold medal and it does not matter whether a boy wins it or a girl and that he has decided that both and will now not touch any cooking utensil or do any household work but they will now become a wrestler and will win medal for the country . starts their training by being very tough coach , waking them up 5 everyday . He maintains their diet and restricts any street - food , spicy food of such and make them exercise . When and complains about how their hair are ruined due to training in dirt - he calls a barber and cut their hairs off . And when he sees that they both are weak - he makes them non - vegetarian . Both sisters are very angry on since he is being very cruel by making two girl child training as a wrestler . So they start doing little tricks to him by changing the alarm and eating spicy food whenever they can and not wrestling properly . But one day when they both attend a wedding of their 14 - year old girl - friend named ( child - marriage ) and she tells them they both are very lucky that is thinking about their career and life and not getting them married at such an early age unlike her family is doing . They realize their mistake and starts training real hard . When the elder sister is ready , takes them to another village for wrestling . All the people oppose that they wo n't let a girl fight with a boy but due to lack of audience and as a means of earning more money the organizer agrees . Almost all village arrives to see a girl fighting and every one is positive that she will lose very badly . Geeta chooses the most strong boy among the competitors to wrestle . She fights real good as opposed to what villagers were thinking and as the fight continues every one in crowd starts cheering for . At end , even though she loses , she wins more prize money from sponsors then the boy . Due to the lose , is not able to sleep and asks his father when will the next wrestling fight be organized . All the people in village who were previously accusing and back - biting about ; starts cheering for and and looks towards them with pride . Both the sisters soon become impossible - to - defeat and wins every next wrestling competition . At the , wins and therefore has to shift at in , for her further training . is upset as she transfer at new place . The new has different training style and does not let use techniques of his . soon befriends with other girls and starts doing other things like shopping , having longer hair , nail polish and makeup , roaming around nights etc apart from her training . When she goes home after few months , she tries to teach her new style of wrestling to her sister and other girls who have now joined 's ring to learn . Seeing that is very firmly advocating her new methods , challanges her but as he is old - age he loses . Since the fight happens very ferociously tells that whatever happened is not good and is losing focus . is also upset about the incident and thinks that he has lost her daughter . starts competing in International matches but she keeps match - after - match . At first she does not even care , but slowly she starts being afraid of her career . Meanwhile , also wins and is moved on to same training centre as . When is despaired due to her continue failure , tells her to make amends with father which does so while crying very much over phone . forgives her . Geeta becomes her old - self by cutting her hair - down again . But she is told by the to not compete in her regular 55 - kg weight group but to lose weight and compete in 51 - kg group . Listening to this , shifts to Patiala near to so that he can help her compete for the same 55 - kg group . He tells to do as her coach says during training session but both sisters and starts doing separate sessions by their old routing of waking up at 5 am . Coach notices that and complains to the authority to send both sisters back . pleads to the authority of letting them stay but gets banned from and girls are also banned to go out . So starts training over phone by watching all her International competing games video recording and telling her at which moment she is doing what mistake . When 2010 is organized in , - takes part in her usual 55 - kg group . sits in audience and keeps on advising her against what her coach tells her to do . Doing according to her father 's advice she wins the first round and semi - finals as well and is qualified for Finals . In a press conference , the coach tries to take all credit but gives statement that it is all her father 's hard - work . Due to this , the coach gets jealous and angry and to take revenge , before starting the match , locks in a room and thinks that let 's see how she wins now without her father ? tries to get out of the room but all his efforts are in vain . The match starts and keeps remembering her father 's advice . After very tough fight ultimately wins 's first gold medal in women 's wrestling in the 55 kg freestyle category against Bensted from . When the ceremony of giving medal to participants is over and according to the rule , winning country 's is played - who hears understood that her daughter has finally completed his dream . The room gets unlocked and he rushes towards arena . Geeta shows the and for the first - time ever both girls and the nephew hear their father saying , " Well - done!".</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The film begins with ( ) illegally stopping the train he is riding on outside the small town of . He rides on his horse to the town 's brothel where he confronts , chases and shoots down a wanted criminal , collecting a bounty of $ 1,000 on ( ) . 's gun slinging skill is displayed as he easily kills him from long distance . After collecting the bounty he inquires the sheriff about " " ( ) , who has a $ 2,000 bounty , and was last seen in . is told that has already been targeted a stranger , who is referred to as " " ( meaning one - handed in - and Italian).We first see ( ) ride into town and track down at a saloon playing five - card draw poker . Manco kills him and his men , and takes the bounty . Elsewhere , a Mexican bandit named ( ) is serving a jail sentence but his gang arrive and kill several guards to free their leader . escapes and more guards are killed but spares the life of one so that he can let people know what he and his men are capable of . Soon , gets hold of the bounty hunter responsible for putting him behind bars . He has the man 's wife and child killed and challenges him to an unfair duel . takes his life . is a ruthless , intelligent man . He has a musical pocket watch that he plays before engaging in gun duels . " When the chimes finish , begin , " he says . In flashbacks ( usually as drifts into narcotic - induced sleep ) it is revealed that the watch originates from a young woman ( ) , who killed herself while being raped by after he had found her with her lover and killed him . The watch bears a photo of the woman and was presented as a gift by the young man before being killed . 's dreams convey a suspicious impression that he is becoming consumed by guilt for the girl 's death . Having learned of 's manhunt and reward money , arrives in the town of and soon crosses paths with . Both men believe will rob the town 's bank - the equivalent of , that holds a safe containing " almost a million dollars " . The two hunters ' theory is confirmed when several of 's men arrive to stake out the town and tries to goad one of the gunmen , The ( ) into a fight but he refuses in order to keep out of trouble . From different sources , and find out that the other is a bounty killer and are obviously chasing the same purpose . Manco tries to get out of town by proving his gun skills by shooting at the 's hat . But proves his own worth and does exactly the same thing to . Realizing they each have skills that would be ideal against fourteen men , and in order to " get between two fires " they reluctantly form a partnership and decide that should go undercover with the outlaws . He rescues one of 's friends from prison and is quickly offered membership into the gang . sends with a few of his men to rob the bank of in order to be decoys and get the sheriff and his men away from . Manco kills the men he is sent with and arrives in to bring down with but the plan goes wrong and the gang successfully rob the bank and take off with the loot . Manco tries to sever his ties with but convinces him otherwise . However when joins back up with , he convinces him to go in the opposite direction to what the planned . The gang arrive in the small border town of , where is surprised to find waiting for him . The hunchback recognizes the from their previous encounter and forces a showdown in which he is killed by the . The then proves his worth to by cracking open the safe without using explosives , but states his intention to wait a month if necessary to allow the furor over the bank robbery to die down and locks the money away in a chest in the treasure room . That night , and the meet in the treasure room and plan to steal the bank money from . The had already taken the money out of the chest earlier and now locks it again with his special ability to open and lock locks without keys . When they leave the treasure room by roof ( because the door is locked ) they realize that the bandits are outside waiting for them , knowing that is actually a bounty killer and that the is his cooperator . Just before jumps down , he throws the bag with the money in a tree unnoticed . When and the have climbed down , 's band severely beat them . Afterwards , finds out that chest is still locked , which makes him believe that and the never stole the money . Later that night , 's right - hand man ( ) , on orders from , kills the guard of and the and releases them . informs his gang that they " got away , " and sends them after the escaped bounty hunters . He intends to kill off his gang with the bounty killers while he and take all the loot for themselves . However , the smarter ( ) figures out what is up to , and kills . Before he can kill , he finds that the has already removed the stolen money from the chest . Indio convinces to join forces with him to trap the bounty - killers . The next morning , and shoot down the gang , one by one , in the streets of the town . Standing alone , shoots when the outlaw tries to run for it , but then has his gun shot out of his hand by , who then takes out his pocket watch and begins playing it to start off a duel . As the chime nears the end , suddenly appears with an identical pocket watch , playing the same tune as 's , which realizes had been taken from him earlier . As this happens , holds a rifle on and gives his gun belt and pistol to , evening the odds . " Now we start , " Manco announces and sits while and face off . During the standoff , looks down at the pocket watch and sees the same picture of the woman had raped . The music finishes , and outdraws and guns down . At this juncture , takes 's pocket watch . Manco gives him back the other watch and remarks on a family resemblance ; the replies , " Naturally , between brother and sister , " indicating that the young woman 's portrait was that of 's sister . His revenge complete , he decides to take no part of the bounty . As tosses the last of the bodies into a wagon and counts them by the reward for each one , he realizes he is short of the $ 27,000 total , and spins around to gun down who had survived and waited in ambush . As he leaves , he takes the bag with the bank money out of the tree , though it is not clear whether he intends to return it . Manco then rides off into the distance with his horse towing the wagon full of the lifeless bodies of the entire gang.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The film 's story is divided into three time - lines:-Blue represents the present - represents close flashbacks , which deal with 3 years earlier - represents distant flashbacks , which deal with aged 8 years oldIn the present and close flashbacks , is played by and is played by . In distant flashbacks , is played by and is played by . A large swarm of bats fly from left to right of shot . Back - lighted by a reddish sky , they make the shape of 's emblem . Distant flashback : and are playing in the garden . falls down an sealed up well and fractures his arm . He is then attacked by a swarm of bats emerging from a large gaping crack at the well base . Present : wakes up from the nightmare in a Chinese prison . It becomes apparent that is regularly attacked by other inmates who brawl with him 6 to 1 at breakfast . Having beaten the majority of them , is punished with solitary confinement by the prison guards . In solitary , is approached by a man called ( ) . displays a great deal of knowledge and authority by getting an audience with from the prison and by stating that he knows who is . then offers a place in the of -- a collective of vigilantes and assassins . He deems that the can offer a path to true justice instead of ' locking himself away with criminals to take them on one at a time . ' Ducard arranges for to be released in the morning , when he will have to decide whether he will accept 's offer . Should he do so he must pick a rare blue flower from the eastern slopes and carry it to the top of a nearby mountain . is released , as promised , and carries out his task . After carrying the flower to the top of the mountain , finds himself at the door of the of headquarters . Inside he meets 's ( ) , the head of the , and is confronted by once again . hands over the blue flower and in doing so completes his test for membership . then suddenly attacks him , warning the exhausted that ' death does not wait for you to be ready . ' Although fights back he is easily beaten and collapses . Distant flashback : is still in the well after being attacked by the bats . His father , ( ) , comes down to rescue him and sets 's fractured arm with the help of the family butler ( ) . comforts by asking ' Why do we fall ? So we can learn to pick ourselves up ' . Later on admits to his father that he was scared of the bats and is now suffering nightmares . After being comforted further , shows his son the pearl necklace he 'll give to his wife as a gift . That night , and take to the opera via monorail . While on the train , confides that the city is in an economic downturn , and his company funded the construction of the trains , routing them into the center of the city . , however , leaves running of the company to more interested people , preferring to work as a doctor at the hospital . While watching the opera is frightened by the bats in the production , which remind him of the bats that attacked him and asks his father if they can leave . Outside , in an alleyway , a man named ( ) accosts them with a revolver and demands the pearl necklace gave to . A fight breaks out , and in the struggle , both and are shot and are mortally wounded . Chill runs away , leaving alone with his parents . Before dying , manages to tell , " Do n't be afraid .... "That night , is watched after at the police station by officer ( ) . through , police commissioner ( ) comes in and informs that the police have caught . is put into 's care . After the funeral , ( ) tells that the company will be looked after until grows up . tries to console when the boy confesses that his parents ' deaths were his fault because he asked to leave the opera early . Present : asks if he still feels responsible for the death of his parents . responds that his is far too angry to feel guilty . His training with the of begins . He is trained in the arts of , , combat theatricality and deception . is trained not only to fight 6 men but to ' engage 600.'Ducard enforces his belief that all forms of crime must be fought without mercy and pity . explains that his wife was murdered and that he joined the when he achieved his vengeance . reveals that he ca n't claim his vengeance . Close flashback : 14 years after his parents were killed , arrives at from ; he 's come home for 's parole hearing . still manages the house and expresses his concern over . is now an and takes to the hearing . Unknown to her , is concealing a revolver , with which he plans to shoot if he is released . In the hearing , expresses remorse for the murder of 's parents and is given parole should he testify against his cellmate , gang boss ( ) . However , before can act , a female assassin posing as a reporter comes up with a pistol in hand and shoots . watches as bleeds to death and the assassin is arrested . Driving away after the incident , lectures afterward on the difference between justice and revenge and reveals that is still suffering because of 's illegal drug empire . then slaps him harshly when he reveals that he was planning to shoot . She tells him that his father would be ashamed of him . , convinced that he has nothing to lose , makes his way to a bar in the underworld to confront . Falcone brags about his control over the city 's police and judges , even pointing out who he has in his pockets who is present . He then threatens and to prove that does have a lot to lose . His thugs beat up and he leaves . Left no other choice but to run away , stows away aboard a cargo ship leaving the port . is then shown in stealing food to survive and eventually getting involved in gangster operations in order to infiltrate them . He is then arrested - ironically , in the act of stealing crates - and sent to the prison discovered him in at the beginning . Present : When reaches a skill level in which he is an equal to the majority in the , he faces in combat . However , he is exposed beforehand to the vapors of the blue flower he brought up to the mountain earlier . The smoke distorts his senses and makes him hallucinate about bats , his greatest fear . overcomes his phobia and employs a clever trick to best in a sword fight , passing the trial . 's sends for him and . 's puts to one final task before becoming a full member of the . The task is to execute a prisoner of the -- a man who has stolen his neighbour 's land and killed them . refuses -- when tells him that his compassion will be a weakness , tells him that it 's too important to simply deny . 's reveals to that he has been trained in order to lead the to , which is corrupted by evil to such an extent that it must be razed . sets a diversion , and lights the 's headquarters on fire and is forced to fight while the the rest of the escapes the wreckage to safety . is knocked out by who then manages to fend off 's , who is killed instantly when a roof beam collapses on him . picks up an unconscious Ducard and rescues him from the building as it explodes . leaves in the care of a villager . contacts , who arrives in a private jet to pick him up . reveals that , who has been away for seven years , has been legally declared dead by so that can take public . says it 's a good thing he willed everything to , who jokes that is welcome to borrow the - .... so long as he brings it back with a full tank . explains to a plan he has to fight the underworld by taking on a new persona , which all criminals will fear . In , a serial killer named ( ) , who is allegedly insane , is being transferred from a regular prison to the on the opinion of ( ) . challenges since is yet another one of 's thugs that has had moved to the and away from prison , and goes unnoticed due to 's corrupt influence . meets with later on that night and demands that be dealt with . When refuses , threatens him with the knowledge that his unknown boss is coming to the city -- Falcone is clearly intimidated by the mention of 's employer . Holed up in , begins to work out what has happened since he has been away . While doing so he spots a bat flying around the ceiling . He goes back to the abandoned well and climbs down . Through the crack in which the bats appeared when he was attacked in his childhood , finds a huge cave filled with bats , which is connected to the lowest foundations of . Coming to terms with his fear he establishes the cave as his base of operations . decides to announce his return and reports to , where he makes a dramatic entrance to his own company 's building by seducing a secretary into playing office golf . , clearly shocked , warns him that he can not prevent the company from going public at this later stage . explains that he is not bothered by this and that all he wants is a job , preferably in . sets this up and goes to meet his new ' boss ' , his father 's best friend ( ) . explains to that the is a dead end , where can reassign employees he considers troublemakers . introduces to some of the equipment he 's invented , that finds worthy . One is a special bulletproof survival suit , a suit that will stop knives and any gun but a straight shot . It was meant for military use , but it apparently never caught on because the did n't think soldiers ' lives were worth the $ 300,000 cost . Other items shows to include a grappling gun and a safety harness . casually asks if he can ' borrow ' the gear for spelunking . allows it , considering all the equipment to belong to anyway , though he is curious why is expecting to run into a lot of gunfire in the caves he 's exploring . continues to explore the cave where he and find the lower foundations of the southeast wing of and an old elevator shaft leading back up the house . also begins to modify the battle suit he borrowed adding bat - shaped gauntlets and spray - painting it a dark black . A few nights later , dons a ski mask and the grappling gear , goes to the police station , and breaks into 's office , recognizing , who since we last saw him has been promoted to sergeant , to be one of the city 's few incorruptible cops . By threatening him with a staple gun behind his back , questions on what it would take to bring to justice . responds that leverage on the corrupt and a brave enough to prosecute will be needed . tells him to watch for his sign , then escapes by jumping off the roof across to the next building , injuring himself in the process . tries to give chase , but it proves worthless to chase a random nut . realizes now that he needs a lightweight fabric to make a glider wing or parachute . He goes back to and asks if there is any technology there that would suit him for ' - jumping . ' shows him a special material called memory cloth , which is designed so that the molecules realign to form any type of rigid shape when an electric current passes through it . then takes interest in a tank - like vehicle called the . As he drives it around an open warehouse floor , explains that it was built as a bridging vehicle for the army . It is able to accelerate to high speeds , is tricked out with a variety of gadgets and weapons , and has a booster rocket that can send the vehicle into a " rampless " jump . At the end of the session , asks what he thinks of the . only has one question : " Does it come in black?"Back in the cave , adds further modifications to his suit , adding a radio transmitter , a cowling , the memory cloth , and a utility belt . He makes steel shurikens in the shape of a bat . He explains to that he has chosen the bat as his symbol because bats frighten him and it 's time that his " enemies shared his dread . "At the docks , and a corrupt police officer , ( ) , are watching 's thugs unload a shipment of drugs from an inbound cargo ship . The drugs are concealed in toys -- stuffed bears and rabbits . The bears are to go to the drug dealers and the rabbits to a mystery man in the -- a poverty - stricken area of overrun by crime . However , three of the thugs mysteriously vanish leaving nothing but a loud scream as they vanish into the darkness . As the others investigate , more disappear . The quickly disposes of the remaining thugs and attacks . and his officers arrive to find the drugs and disarmed thugs at the scene and Falcone bound to a searchlight with his coat cut in such a way as to produce the shadow of a bat in the night sky . Meanwhile , is getting off a monorail train , while being shadowed by two of 's thugs . She notices one and threatens him with a taser . He runs in fear when he sees beating up the second thug . As turns she screams at the sight of . He produces photographs compromising and then disappears as a police officer shows up . The news the next day of a ' ' has the whole city talking . is not happy that a vigilante is doing the job the police are meant to do , in spite of 's defense that the vigilante did hand them on a platter . and the 's office decide that there is enough evidence to put on trial despite it been given to them by a vigilante . Alfred wakes up at 3 o'clock in the afternoon , despite 's pleas for more sleep , and then frets over the bruises and injuries that he has taken the previous night . He shows a news story about his adventure from the night before and informs that he must live the life he would normally in public in order not to raise suspicion - doing such things as drive exotic sports cars , date movie stars , buy things that are not for sale , etc . He also tells that the bruises he 's sporting now need an excuse , like playing polo , which says he wo n't do . , meanwhile , gets word that a weapon , a microwave emitter , has been stolen from one of their cargo ships , and the crew of said ship has apparently been killed . The emitter is another military weapon , which uses focused microwaves to vaporize an enemy 's water supply . takes 's advice quite to the extreme . This starts with him going to a party at a hotel with two female escorts , who almost get kicked out by bathing in the decorative fountain , a situation resolves by writing a check and purchasing the hotel on the spot . There he meets for the first time since returning from . Although he tries to convince her that the way he is acting is n't really him , she tells him that " it 's not who you are underneath , but what you do that defines you . "Falcone has cut his wrists in prison to bolster his insanity plea and enable a move to . is brought in to assess his " insanity " . Once they 're alone , demands that move him in return for not suggesting the police have a closer look at the drugs he has been trafficking for . thinks for a moment about what to do . He then asks if he wants to see the mask he uses in his experiments at the , which he says the patients ca n't stand . He pulls a burlap - sack mask out of his briefcase . He releases gas from his suitcase and puts on the mask , which acts as an air filter . Falcone screams with fear at the hallucinations caused by the gas , which make the mask more terrifying . is next seen leaving the room with his masked stored away , while 's screams can still be heard . tells the warden that is n't faking and should be moved to the . The following night pays a visit to and tells him that only half the drugs brought in on 's ship were to be sent to the dealers . He and conclude that it would help to interrogate , who identified at the docks making his escape . is pickpocketing money from a falafel vendor on the street . As he walks away into a narrow alley , he springs a trap and is flown upside - down to the rooftops , suspended from 's grappling cord . Threatened by , tells him about the bear and rabbit shipments , that the rabbits make their way to the , and that there is some other substance hidden in the rabbits . returns to the ground and disappears . Meanwhile , 's boss , , is quietly murdered by an assassin disguised as a police officer when he finds ' missing microwave emitter in one of 's containers . makes his way back to the and finds an apartment riddled with cuddly rabbit toys stuffed with the drugs . At that moment and two of his men enter and hides . At 's orders , the thugs douse gasoline around the apartment . comes out of hiding and beats the two thugs . , wearing his burlap mask , emerges and gasses him with the same gas he used on , using gas cylinders hidden in his shirt cuffs . falls helplessly to the floor and scrambles around hallucinating bats and his parents ' death . douses him in gasoline while taunting him . He then lights a cigarette lighter and throws it at 's chest , causing his suit to burst into flames . throws himself out of the window into the rain swept streets of the and hits the street with a thud . Desperately rolling around he puts out the flames , to the shock of the on - lookers , and then stumbles about trying to get his grapple gun . He fires the gun upwards and is carried to to a nearby rooftop . From there he grabs his communicator and calls for to help him . arrives and takes into the car and drives him to the . Still suffering the effects of the aerosol sprayed him with , yammers , telling him to ' take poison ... blood ... blood poison ' , before passing out . Hearing his father 's voice asking ' , why do we fall ? " , wakes up in his bed as if from a nightmare . reveals that he has been unconscious for two days and that today is his birthday -- ' many happy returns . ' tells him that he has felt the effects of whatever used on him before but not as strongly . comes in and warns against ' hanging out in the wrong nightclubs ' and after making a point of how hard he has worked to save , explains that he has created an antidote to the toxic gas . When asked if he could make any more of the antidote , expresses concern that is willing to ' go back to the same club ' and gas himself again , but he promises to bring what he has . He also explains that the antidote will inoculate people against the toxin . turns up at the to give his birthday present and to apologize that she ca n't make his birthday party that night . Her boss has been missing for two days ; she jokes bitterly about searching the river for his body . She cuts away from the conversation as she get a text message informing her that has been moved from prison to on 's orders . She rushes off to challenge 's decision . Knowing the she is in danger from , changes to , despite the guests who will soon arrive for his party . arrives at and watches -- now genuinely insane -- mumbling the word " " over and over . When she questions on the meaning of scarecrow , explains that a significant number of inmates focus their paranoia on an external tormentor , such as a scarecrow . Both are unaware that is listening from outside . When demands that be evaluated by , the court 's psychiatrist , leads her into the lower floors of the , where he reveals inmates who are pouring a toxin into the water pipes below . runs for it but catches her , now wearing his burlap mask , and gasses her with his toxin . A terrified is interrogated by in the basement . Suddenly the lights go out . acknowledges that the has arrived . He tells the guards not to worry about as she has been given a concentrated dose and will not last long , but to phone the police . He explains that the police ca n't stop the toxin , but might -- unless the police stop him first . Although 's henchmen are prepared , appears in the basement and overcomes them all easily . He gasses with his own toxin . With hallucinating that 's mask has become monstrously frightening , lets slip that he is working for 's before slams him into a wall , knocking him unconscious . picks up and takes her high up on the landing before the huge stairway at 's entrance . The police arrive . Not willing to wait for backup in the form of a team as is , goes into the building and is grabbed by . The teams arrive . explains to that he needs to get to his hideout so he can give her the antidote to the toxin . But ca n't escape the team while carrying , so he asks carry her to the alley outside on the side . He then activates a device in the heel of his boot , which emits a high - pitched signal , that calls his " backup " . takes down the stairway as the crew raids the building . As they begin to set up , a huge swarm of bats breaks into the building in response to 's signal . With bats everywhere distracting the officers , drops from the stairway using his cape to land safely . He breaks into the prisoners ' area , courteously apologizing for disturbing the inmates , and uses explosives to break outside . There he meets and takes from him . refuses further help from , knowing he ca n't take him too , and gets into the . He hurries back to the , with police cars and helicopters in hot pursuit . A very dramatic car chase ensues as weaves through parking garage ramps , over church roofs , underground tunnels , and highways , destroying multiple police cars with evasive manuevers and caltrops to blow out their tires and the vehicle 's stealth technology , making it invisible to the police helicopters chasing him . He returns to the to find that has delivered three vials of the toxin 's antidote , one of which he uses to save . gets a report from the detectives studying the toxin in the water . 's whole water system is laced with the stuff ; it must have taken weeks to prepare the material . No one has noticed anything up to now because the toxin apparently has no effect unless it 's inhaled . Meanwhile , wakes up inside the cave and explains what has happened . He tells her he is going to sedate her and when she wakes up she will be at home with the two remaining vials of the antidote . She must get them to -- one for him to inoculate himself and one for mass production . He sedates her and gets changed for his party . tells about and asks him to take her home . He goes to the party downstairs to a chorus of . He meets , who tells him that the stock offering was a success ; the buyers were mostly trusts and brokerages . finds and thanks him for the antidote vials that he delivered . then tells him what has happened . interrupts that the water wo n't help disperse an inhalant . He stops and thinks . He says the stolen the microwave emitter could vaporize all the water in the mains , releasing the toxin . He reveals that he has been fired by for asking too many questions about it . asks him to break into and begin making more antidote . is carted off unwillingly to another section of the party by . When she insists that he must meet a man called 's , she suddenly has 's attention . As the figure turns around , it is clearly not 's . whispers that he watched 's die . A familiar voice from behind asks ' but is 's immortal ? Are his methods supernatural ? ' turns around to the sight of . thinks slowly before figuring out that is the true 's and the man fought back at the of was a decoy . 's muses that they both have double identities . He then lectures on the weakness of compassion . Even though had saved his life , he will still destroy . 's gives a chance to get the innocent guests out of the house , which he does by acting drunk and insulting them . After demands his guests leave him in peace , he and 's walk together . 's explains that 's fear toxin is derived from the blue flowers back in and that he found a way of weaponising it . Crane , however , is not a member of the of and his idea of the plan was that they would hold the city to ransom . 's explains that must be destroyed because of how corrupt it is -- which he illustrates by explaining that the of has infiltrated every level of its infrastructure . The scene is intercut with a series of shots showing members of the disguised as officials and police officers releasing people from -- including and , who , still under the effects of his own fear toxin , only mumbles ' scarecrow . 'Back at the , 's offers one last chance to join and help the , which refuses , claiming that there are still good people in the city and that is n't beyond saving . 's nods to other members , who set fire to the mansion . 's explains that has been attacked by the before through economics , which caused the depression when was a child . 's hoped that the city would destroy itself through the unequal distribution of wealth , however certain members of the rich families , such as 's parents , donated money to help recover . But 's is back to the finish the job . With this 's attacks and pushes him in the way of a falling beam which pins an unconscious to the floor . With burning around him 's says ' Justice is balance . You burned down my house and left me for dead . Consider us even . 'Meanwhile the is in a state of panic as hundreds of rapists and murders are freed from the . wakes up in her bed with the two vials of antidote . arrives back at and uses a golf club to knock out a member guarding the house . Praying that the man was not a member of the fire department , rushes into the burning house and rouses . Managing to free himself , is led to the cave by as the house collapses . Alfred inspects for injuries as is torn about the destruction of his father 's house . tells him that the legacy is more than bricks and mortar and quotes : ' Why do we fall , ? So that we can learn to pick ourselves up . 'Police in full strength are moving from central across the bridge to the island . , being a , is allowed to pass . She finds and gives him the antidote . explains that they are going to raise the bridges to the island and they need to get off before they do . One last is allowed over to the secretly carrying 's , a handful of his henchmen and the microwave emitter . A train , on the overhead line is stopped by the where the emitter is being prepared to be hoisted up to it . While the drawbridges are raised , 's sets off the machine causing all of the water in the pipes below the streets to vaporize and blow the pipes open in the . The toxin is released and affects everyone in the Narrows including the escaped convicts and the police alike . inoculates himself with the antidote and finds a fearful ready to shoot two innocent and equally frightened teenagers . knocks him out and handcuffs him to a railing . Meanwhile the few remaining people of the force wonder what is going on . The Narrows begins to tear itself apart . In the streets , people violently attack one another . is confronted by on a horse whose previous rider , a riot cop , is dragged behind . Wearing his burlap mask , announces to her his new alias , ' the . requests reinforcements but to his dismay he is told that all of the riot police are already on the island and there is no one left to send . Suddenly the jumps across the gap from to the . explains to that 's intends to use the train to carry the microwave emitter to . When the train reaches at the center of , the microwave emitter will vaporise the contents of all the water mains , covering the whole city with the toxin and creating mass panic beyond the . He asks for help and gives him the key to the . The is about to run down . She fires her taser and hits him in the face . His horse carries him away screaming . is surrounded by a dozen inmates from , including the serial killer , carrying a knife . jumps from above them , cracking over the head , picks up and carries her to a rooftop and to safety . As leaves her she asks him who he is . He replies ' It 's not who I am underneath , but what I do that defines me ' -- quoting her own words back at her . She says ' ? ' as he jumps from the rooftop and uses his memory cloth cape as a glider . As he seemingly flies in the air , the fearful people below shriek in terror as their hallucinations warp the sight of him . orders the main bridge to be lowered and starts up the . 's is overseeing the madness below as his men fasten the microwave emitter into place on board the train . He spots gliding towards him . lands on the train platform . 's comments that he took his advice on theatricality a bit too literally and boards the train . Four members of the appear and prevent from pursuing . During the fight , tries to uses his grapple hook to secure himself to the train but it is knocked out of his hand . The fight takes all participants down to the street floor where manages to overcome all four members . However he is ganged up on by dozens of terrified and angry citizens . As 's starts the train overhead , finds his grapple gun and fires it at the train . He 's dragged behind the train . meanwhile is following the 's GPS system toward . As the bridges are lowered , 's 's train breaks the water pipes , releasing the toxic gas . The is not far behind . manages to pull himself to the train . He smashes through one of the train windows and engages an infuriated 's . takes 's sword and breaks it in two with his gauntlets . Distracting 's , he stabs the sword into the braking controls of the train . arrives at . He arms the 's defense systems and fires missiles at a train rail foundation . With the train approaching , 's gets the upper hand over and taunts him : ' Do n't be afraid , . You are just an ordinary man in a cape . That 's why you could n't fight injustice , that 's why you ca n't stop this train . ' replies , ' who said anything about stopping it ? ' 's looks up and notices a half of his sword sticking in the brake control . As this happens destroys the foundation and breaks the railway line with the 's missiles . With this distraction , regains the upper hand and pins 's . explains that he wo n't kill 's -- but he does n't have to save him , either . He blows out the back end of the train car , throws himself out , and glides away . 's can only look up to watch the train propel itself off the line and into the street below . The microwave emitter is damaged by the impact and explodes , destroying the whole train . The next day , arrives at to chair a meeting . He 'd shocked to find that the meeting has already begun -- and is led by , who reveals he has 's job . is in the back of his car reading a newspaper : has made the front page and is on page 8 under the headline ' Down . ' He takes a call from , who asks on what authority can decide who runs . states that he is the owner . reminds him that the company has gone public . explains that he bought most of the shares through various trusts and brokerages . agrees with 's words , and asks , " Did n't you get the memo ? " in reference to the words told him when firing him from AS.Back at , is nailing boards over the old well in the garden when he is approached by . He apologizes for not telling her about his identity earlier . She apologizes for slapping him the day died and for the horrible things that she said before he disappeared . tells her that what she said was true and that he was just a coward with a gun . He thanks her . She says that when she heard that he was back she began to hope . She moves closer towards him and kisses him . She then explains that she then found out about his mask -- his actual face . She explains that his true face is the cowl of and that the boy she loved long ago never came back . But maybe one day they can be together when is no longer needed . nods . tells him that she was wrong and that 's father would be proud of him , just as she is . is walking through the rubble of the and asks about what he will do . replies that he 'll rebuild it just the way it was before . turns to leave . wonders if it 's a good time to improve the foundations of the - east corner . agrees and they walk off . That night , meets , who reveals that he has recently been made a lieutenant . has also made a version of the signal that had made with . talks about how the Narrows are lost to a new crime wave and the escalation between law enforcement methods and criminal methods such as the police wearing leading to criminals buying armor - piercing ammunition . He expresses concern that the city 's dependence on may have negative consequences . uses a recent case as an example : a criminal with a taste for theatrics whom has killed two people . The suspect leaves a calling card at the scene of each crime . gives the evidence : a playing card ( see ( 2008 ) ) . says that he will look into it . then assures that they can make safe again and he jumps from the roof and glides away.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > A woman decides to abandon her baby in the backseat of an automobile with a handwritten note attached , beseeching the finder to care for and love the child . The baby is discovered by the initially - reluctant , who eventually softens and comes to love him as his own . As the boy grows up , both he and The must learn to navigate through a life that spawns one adventure after > 

 < synopsis > , a saxophonist and , a bassist , are two working - class musicians , playing in a speakeasy band in , 1929 . Though they have steady work , they still owe money to many of their friends and several of the girls in the chorus line . However , , the optimist , is n't worried since the gig they have seems to be stable . does flirt briefly with the idea of taking all the money he and have and betting it on a greyhound race but the plan is soon discarded . changes a few minutes later when a police officer , , working on a hot tip from a mob informant , , leads a raid on the place for illegal liquor sales . The speakeasy itself belongs to 's most notorious mob boss , . and barely escape the raid . Jobless , they try to figure out a plan to earn money ; suggests they hock their overcoats and bet the money on a long shot at the dog racing track . 's plan fails miserably and the guys are more broke than ever during a bitterly cold winter . and go to the offices of their talent agents , whom have no work for them . They go to the last one , 's , where talks to the receptionist , , whom he has been dating . She tells him that has openings for a sax player and bass player in a band that will be traveling to . In 's office , is on the phone frantically trying to find replacement musicians for , the band 's leader , and her assistant , . 's band is all - female and she has a strict " NO " policy ; 's frustrated because one of her players got pregnant and another ran off to get engaged . and , not knowing is looking for women , burst into 's office and ask for the gig . Poliakoff informs them that they 're the wrong gender , but he does have a gig in , , for one night . and accept and into loaning them her car to drive to the gig . and go to the garage where 's car awaits . The garage happens to belong to and a group of shady - looking men are playing cards in the corner . While the mechanic fills the car with gas , a large limo rolls into the garage and several gang members , armed with shotguns and machine guns get out . and hide behind 's car while everyone else is lined up against the wall . The gangsters who burst into the place work for , who steps from the limo . He has come to 's garage seeking revenge for the bust at his speakeasy . He gives the command and his men slaughter everyone against the wall ( a reference to the infamous 's perpetrated by ) . The gas nozzle in 's car suddenly pops out when the tank is full and clatters on the ground , drawing the attention of ' men , who see and . Spats orders them to be killed too , while at the same time , , still alive , tries to reach a nearby phone . grabs a and brutally finishes off , temporarily forgetting and , who escape . One of ' goons shoots at them but only succeeds in hitting 's bass . and , now on the run , call 's office , planning to fool their agent into thinking they 're the women musicians needed for 's band . and , dressed as women , arrive at the train station . They use false names ; becomes and becomes ( he 'd originally agreed to be , but tells he never liked the name ) . They meet and and fool them effectively enough to be hired . They also spot the band 's singer and , the attractive and blond , who goes by " . " Both men are instantly attracted to her , especially . During a band practice on the train drops a flask of bourbon ; alcohol is strictly forbidden by . reminds that he warned her not to hide liquor , however , tells them it 's his flask and covers for . Later that night , sneaks into 's berth to thank for covering for her . suggests that they both share a drink of whiskey , which steals from 's suitcase in the berth below his . The other women in the band quickly discover and and assume they 're having a party . and go to the ladies ' room to prepare some ice and during their conversation , tells that she 's had bad luck with romance and men and that she has a soft - spot for saxophone players . is floored but keeps his composure and they share a drink together . In his berth , finds that the other girls are becoming a bit too physical and , afraid they 'll find out his true identity , pulls the emergency cord , stopping the train . All the girls spill out of his berth and the party grinds to halt , flustered by the whole ordeal . The train arrives in and the band is taken to their hotel . leaves to carry all their luggage and as climbs the steps to the entrance , he loses a shoe . A rich man , places it back on her feet and proceeds with improper advances toward 's alter ego . slaps after he gropes him in the elevator . In their room , tells they should leave the band and go further into hiding . tells him they should stay in disguise since 's gang would never look for them in an all - woman band . is also attracted to , though he does n't sight that as a reason for staying , and has his own plans to woo her . Sugar shows up and invites the two to the beach ; joins her but declines . After they leave , takes out a suitcase he 'd stolen from ( along with the man 's glasses ) and dresses up in a fashionable sailor 's outfit . goes down to the beach and sits in a chair , reading the . He attracts the attention of and presents himself as an heir to the . Sugar begins to flirt with him , however , he remains aloof , telling her he 's waiting for a signal from his yacht offshore . happens by and almost instantly recognizes . He convinces to go back to his and 's hotel room to expose him as an impostor . beats them back there and they find him in the tub , covered with bubbles and posing as . tells that she 's probably met a millionaire and she leaves . When she does , launches into a tirade about faking an identity on the beach and that is trying to take advantage of . A furious responds by rising slowly out of the tub , still in his outfit , and plops his wet wig down on 's head . receives a ship - to - shore call from Osgood : wants to invite to have dinner with him aboard his yacht . takes charge of the invitation and tells to persuade to take him to a dinner and dancing club instead of the yacht . will go to the yacht as with . That night , while & play with the band at dinner , receives a giant bouquet of flowers from . When the gig ends , rushes back to his room and assumes the disguise , while and go to the restaurant . arrives at the dock just before and takes her to the yacht on 's boat . While the two have drinks and eat , again acts aloof towards , trying to persuade her to kiss him . At first he acts as though he has a psychological block that prevents him from enjoying their romantic evening , but eventually turns him on . On the shore , and dance the tango at a nearby roadhouse all night , seemingly enjoying the date . Sugar and return to the mainland near dawn , apparently in love . He bids farewell to and climbs up to his room where is lying on one of the beds . tells he 's engaged ; when asks " who 's the lucky girl ? " says he is himself because proposed to . The two have a brief debate where reveals his plan to marry and tell him the truth right after the ceremony . He plans to extort a large settlement out of and live on the alimony checks he believes he 'll receive . convinces that he 's committing fraud and will be caught . realizes his plan will fail and shows the pricey diamond bracelet gave to him as an engagement gift , saying he 'll return it . suggests they keep it , perhaps thinking they can hock it for cash . In the hotel lobby , and his goons arrive for a convention of " of " , cover for a meeting of organized crime gangsters . The organization and meeting are being led by , the most powerful gangster there . already has a rivalry with , which has been exacerbated by ' murder of , who was a good friend of . and , in the lobby , spot Spats and his crew and immediately get into the elevator to return to their room . Just as the doors are about to close , and his men enter the elevator ; and 's disguises work on them and they make it to their room . They pack hurriedly and wants to take care of one last detail : Sugar . He calls her and once again uses his voice , telling her that he has to leave suddenly . His parents have told him to marry a woman who is the daughter of another millionaire with a large empire . As a final gesture , leaves a bouquet of flowers outside 's room with 's diamond bracelet ( the gift to ) hidden inside . Sugar is devastated but accepts the gift . and climb out the window to avoid running into the gangsters again . However , their path takes them right past ' balcony and they 're spotted . grabs the bass left behind and sees the bullet holes from when the two escaped in . Spats and his men chase them through the hotel but lose them . At one point , and disguise themselves as a bellhop and a man in a wheelchair and duck into a banquet room , the same room all the gangsters will be eating dinner in . While they hide under the huge table , a pair of shoes with spats on them slides under the table . The two sit still and wait . begins the meeting with a lengthy criticism of himself , admonishing him for the assassination on 's and for sloppily letting and escape . seems to forgive ' indiscretion and lightens the mood by announcing they will celebrate ' birthday . Spats points out that his birthday is n't for a few months but insists they still have a large cake for . After the cake is brought in and lights dimmed , the entire room sings to and a gangster pops up out of the cake and shoots and his crew with a . and burst out from under the table and run out of the room . Just as orders his men to catch them , cop walks in and demands to know what happened . avoids the question and promises to start a federal investigation . and retreat to their room , fixing their disguises once again . They overhear a gangster saying that they 've got all the standard escape routes covered . realizes that they can escape on 's yacht and tells to call the millionaire and accept his marriage proposal . Before they leave , wanders into the dining and dancing hall of the hotel and sees singing " I 'm Through With " . Moved , approaches her and kisses her . Sugar realizes who really is and leaves the band , following and to 's speedboat . They all board it and head for the yacht . tries to tells that he 's a cad who took advantage of her and that he 's a sax player who will only treat her badly . Sugar does n't care and kisses him anyway . begins to tell that he 's equally as treacherous , that he smokes , has been living with another man ( ) , and ca n't have children , however does n't care . , frustrated , finally pulls off his wig and tells he 's actually a man . Osgood replies , " Well , nobody 's perfect . "</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) visits her father ( ) in his flat after he becomes belligerent with his recent caretaker . has dementia and constantly forgets important life events and where things are around his flat , including his watch , despite the fact that he places it in the same place every day . He tells he thought his recent caretaker stole his watch and that he will never leave his flat . tells she plans to leave and move to to live with her new boyfriend , which confuses since he states she 's married to . tells him they 've been divorced for five years and leaves . The next day , sees an unknown man ( ) , and is confused by him living in his flat . states that lives with him and . returns from the market with chicken for dinner and appears as a different woman ( ) . This confuses to the point of frustration . schedules for a new caretaker interview in his house , ( ) , in which claims he was a professional dancer and that he does n't need any living assistance . later states after she is hired that she reminds him of his other daughter , whom he has n't talked to for months for reasons he is unaware of . is taken to a doctor by and is asked about his memory ; he claims he has no memory problems . tells about how proud he is of his daughter , who is a painter . tells him she is very sorry about 's accident , to which says he 's unaware what she 's referring to . drops the subject and moves on , giving him his medication . Over the course of the film , it is revealed that has really been living in and 's flat for years , but believes he still lives in his private flat . The night comes back with the chicken from the market , she and ( ) have an argument over a vacation to they had to cancel in order to deal with the fallout of 's earlier belligerent behavior to the caretaker , and about how much sacrifices for her father . , this time played by , asks how long he plans to stay in their flat and annoy everyone , leading to slapping to the point of crying . wakes up in his room and walks out of the flat , only to find himself in a hospital hallway . He remembers his daughter ( ) died in a car accident at the hospital . He sees her bloody body in the hospital room then wakes up in a completely different bedroom , now in a nursing home . His nurse , ( ) , checks in on him and informs him has moved to with and visits on occasional weekends . Another nurse , ( ) , also visits during their interaction . has an emotional breakdown over his inability to understand the world anymore and 's disappearance and states he wants his mother and proclaims that he is " losing his leaves . " Catherine comforts him as he cries and tells him she 'll take him outside to the park later that day . The film ends with a shot of leaves on a tree.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > At a prestigious awards ceremony , the celebrities of the theatrical world gather to honor one of their brightest new stars : the amazing young ( ) , whose meteoric rise to fame is unprecedented . Looking on from the audience are many other famous thespians and figures of the theater : the well known director ( ) , the successful playwright ( ) and his wife ( ) , and one of the brightest stars of , the incomparable ( ) . All look upon with a mixture of distaste and disgust on their faces , while off to the side sits the well known and often reviled theater critic ( ) , who , with a bemused look on his face , begins to recount 's recent past . He , better than anyone else , knows all about . Not so long ago , was just a star - struck young woman , waiting outside the stage door night after night , hoping to catch a glimpse of her idol . Finally noticed and brought in by 's friend , gushes her unworthiness and gratitude , and manages to ingratiate herself quickly into 's life as a general assistant . She also impresses 's long - time mate as a helpful and guileless girl who wants nothing more than to be of use . Before long , is living in 's home , answering telephones and bringing her breakfast in bed . , 's maid ( ) begins to dislike , and tells that it 's unnerving the way studies her every move . She can sense trouble brewing . Thus alerted to 's behavior , become 's suspicious , and while all around assure her that is an innocent kid just trying to help , she begins to see plots and schemes everywhere . Holding a party for 's birthday , gets a little too drunk and angrily abuses everyone . Confiding in after 's stinging accusations , asks a favor : could possibly put in a good word for her with her playwright husband ? She 's consider it the greatest thing in her life if she could serve as 's unworthy understudy the new play he 's writing . gladly assents , and all too soon gets her chance to show her own abilities . is famous for being late , and at an ordinary read - through which she fails to attend , upstages badly , astonishing the critic with her wonderful abilities . Suddenly there 's a new kid in town , and under her very nose is stealing all of 's attention . Stunned by , has an angry confrontation with , who decides it 's time he said goodbye . and have also become fed up with 's attitude towards , and decides to teach her old friend a lesson . A suspiciously empty gas tank prevents from returning from a weekend getaway in time for that night 's performance , and takes the stage . The performance is very good , and begins to take more than a passing interest in the career of . Waiting outside her dressing room , he overhears as she tries to seduce away from . refuses her advances , and steps in to the opportunity . His review in the paper lauds and quotes her as saying some rather nasty things about . Shaken into the realization that has been justly suspicious of all along , returns and and rally around their old friend . even proposes marriage to , and they all celebrate over dinner , but a note arrives for during the meal . is waiting in the ladies room , begging to listen to what she has to say . Curious but armed with complete distrust , she finds lamenting this terrible turn of events . has twisted her words she claims , and the last thing in the world wanted was to hurt her idol . For a moment , believes is sincere , and reassures her that will recover . Rising to leave , asks another favor . She wants to make sure the lead in her husband 's next play is given to her . is suddenly hard and cold , and , confused , refuses at first . however has a nasty threat to hold over . She 'll reveal to just who it was that arranged that empty gas tank , and kept out of the city . Stunned , must assent , and returns to the table not knowing just what to do . announces she 's decided not to be in that new play 's writing anyway , and is forced to laugh at the bizarre turn of events while the others wonder just what is so funny . Soon is on stage as the lead in 's play , with reluctantly directing . Everyone is fighting backstage , but reveals herself as a master at manipulation , coddling and soothing everyone to keep them working together , all the while driving wedges into their relationships . She also begins to work on stealing away from , and by the time they are ready to open off , has set the stage for her greatest triumph . has followed events closely and has become 's closest adviser , attending the rehearsals . Walking her back to the hotel in the afternoon before opening night , he implements a plan of his own . Telling that he will be taking control of her career , she becomes angry with him and tells him to get out . She announces that is leaving for her , and once she has him under her control , there will be no limit to what she can achieve . has other plans . He has had a long talk with 's wife , and he know much more than thinks . He also knows that herself is nothing what she seems ; she has lied about her past , her name , everything in fact , and he now has the power to wreck her career before it really starts . Also , is not leaving his wife for her . will now do as he says . "You're an improbable person , , " he says , " but so am We have that in common . Also a contempt for humanity , an inability to love or be loved , insatiable ambition - and talent . We deserve each other . " Finding her own manipulations turned against her , is forced to accept 's terms . She collapses on the bed in tears . And so we return to the prestigious ceremony where the wonderful is accepting an award from a room full of her peers . Cold and calculating , she has achieved all her ambitions at the cost of all trust or friendship . will go on being , and will be left to her own bitterness at being under 's control . Returning to her empty hotel room , she pours a drink , and is startled to see a young woman sleeping in a chair behind her . "Who are you ? " demands angrily . The young woman is , a high - school girl who admires her immensely . The doorbell rings , and , too tired to answer it , accepts 's offer of help . At the door is , returning with 's forgotten award . In a glance , he takes in and all her shallow ambition , and as he leaves he smiles sardonically , knowing that the cycle is beginning all over again.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The movie opens with a TV advertisement for , It discusses the nature of brokers , describing them as bulls or lions . A lion walks through one of the floors of the company . We next see a large group of brokers playing a game where they throw little people onto a board with a dollar sign for a bulls - eye . ( ) then introduces himself among those playing this game . He tells us that he is the son of two accountants living in , . Ever since he started working on , has enjoyed a life of endless drugs and countless hookers of his choosing . He is seen blowing cocaine into a hooker 's butt , and then later flying a helicopter while hopped up on quaaludes . We also see him driving his and getting a blowjob from a woman revealed to be his wife ( ) . According to , he does enough drugs to sedate the majority of 's population . The one drug he loves the most , however , is the one that can make man conquer the world : money . He snorts a line of coke with a $ 100 bill , crumples it up , and then tosses it in a wastebasket . When he was 22 years old , began working on while married to a woman named ( ) . He starts working as a broker and he meets his smooth - talking , easygoing boss ( ) , along with another abrasive and foul - mouthed co - boss , ( ) . is astonished at how everybody talks and works . He has lunch with , who is doing a rhythmic chant while pounding his chest . orders enough martinis for them to " pass the fuck out " . He asks how many times he jerks off : says about three or four times a week . says those are rookie numbers and that he does it at least twice a day . He starts babbling to about how nobody knows if the stocks will go up , down , sideways , or whatever , and that it 's all a " fugazi " . 's primary reason for going into stocks was pretty much just for hookers and blow . He gets to join in the " . starts his first day with his broker 's license on what happens to be 19 , 1987 - aka , . The stocks around the world plummet , and loses his job . At home , suggests they pawn her engagement ring as he looks through the jobs section in the paper . He comes across one place in : " " located in a small mini - shopping center . shows up to in a suit . The place is merely a small establishment that hardly looks professional , with most of the brokers dressing casually & the office being a dingy , unkempt workspace . is greeted by ( ) , the man who runs the place . He assigns to pitch a sale for a company called , a small company out of a garage in , . is also a " pink sheet " ( low value ) stock and he will receive 50 % of the commission . calls a potential investor about . He sells it to him as a huge company ( we 're treated to a pic that shows it looking no bigger than a tool shed ) , but the way he pitches it draws everybody 's attention . Everybody in the office stops what they 're doing to listen to , who makes a very slick but also very professional sales pitch . He succeeds in making the sale and his new coworkers are impressed . After a few months , is making serious money . He is approached in a diner by a bespectacled man with fluorescent white teeth named ( ) . He asks if the outside is his car , to which says ' yes ' . says he lives in the same apartment building as and mentions he works selling children 's furniture . He asks how much money he makes , and says he made $ 72,000 the previous month . Not believing it , asks to see a pay stub for $ 72,000 . pulls one out , and calls his boss to tell him he 's quitting to go into stocks . and have drinks at a bar . We learn that married his cousin because he did n't like the idea of anybody else trying to sleep with her . Outside , smokes some crack and offers some to . He takes one hit and gets pumped , telling they need to go running . The two find a garage where they plan to set up a business . recruits some of his friends to join . They include ( ; nicknamed " " ) , ( ; nicknamed " " ) , ( ) , ( ; nicknamed " " because of his shoddy toupee ) , and ( ) . is especially well known for making drug sales in his old neighborhood . tells to sell him a pen that he pulls out of his pocket . tells him to write something on a napkin . says he does n't have a pen , and " sells " it to him . also brings along several guys from , including a guy called ( and set up what is basically a boiler room in an abandoned auto garage . The guys are all set up at desks , ready to make calls with a script that wrote for them . They start with blue chip stocks like and AT&T. calls one investor to purchase stocks in . anticipates closing the deal by making crude sexual gestures to everyone just as the investor signs on . From there , creates and forms it into a much larger business with even more brokers working for him . He has groups of ambitious and hopeful brokers clamoring in his office showing off their resumes to his face . As one makes a sale , the whole floor celebrates , with a marching band and a big group of hookers . They even have one female employee get her head shaved if pays her $ 10,000 for her to use for breast implants . Over the next few years , news of 's success gets around , from to the , specifically ( ) . does a hatchet piece on , calling him a " sleazy " and dubbing him " the of . " is at first angry about it , but tells him there 's no such thing as bad publicity and more young and eager brokers flock to his office . They bring on 's father , whom everyone refers to as " Mad " ( ) due to his constantly irritable attitude . He oversees his son 's accounts and berates him and his partners for spending $ 26,000 for a dinner , interrupting their chat about using the little people for their game ( as seen throws a party at his beachfront house where he announces a plan to take the company " into the FUCKING ! " He is about to explain to us the effects of quaaludes , but suddenly rises and slowly goes over to 's pool table in slow motion , mumbling the name " . " , as notes , was the big name in women 's shoes . then sees for the first time . He runs down to introduce himself , inviting her to join him on his jet ski . 's wife ( ) sees this and tries to get away from by saying needs his help . then goes downstairs and starts masturbating to in front of the whole party . takes out to dinner one night . When he takes her home , she invites him to her apartment for some tea . is extremely tempted by her , right before she steps out of her room fully nude . The two have sex for 11 seconds before tries to get it going again . He continues his affair with for a while before catches doing coke off her breasts in the back of a limo . She pulls out and starts smacking him . She tearfully asks him if he loves , but he does n't reply . Narrating again in voice - over , says he felt bad about hurting ... and then filed for divorce three days later . Naomi moves into 's apartment . She hires a decorator to redo the place to 's liking , and she also hires a gay butler named ( ) . likes him until the night that comes home to find that is holding a gay orgy in the apartment . She goes crying to and tells him that $ 20,000 in cash is missing from their room as well as $ 30,000 worth of jewelry and other appliances . , , , and interrogate about what he knows about the missing money . refuses to answer questions ( clearly protecting his gay friends ) and quickly changes the subject by openly telling them that he thinks them questioning him is just gay prejudice . Chester punches him hard in the nose , and he and hold by his legs over the balcony to try to make him confess . calls the cops , who arrest for stealing , and kick his ass instead . manages to recover the stolen cash through money laundering . Since he recognizes that these practices are illegal , he hires an attorney , ( ) , to keep them clear . All cares about is that he 's making more money than he and anybody else can know what to do with . proposes to with a yellow diamond ring and she accepts . He holds a bachelor party in , where even the plane ride consists of a lot of hookers , alcohol and a lot of cocaine . The wedding is also a pretty big event . Naomi introduces to her ( ) , who is aware of 's cocaine use . and move out of their penthouse and buy a large mansion on . He even buys a yacht as a wedding gift ( it 's also named Naomi).Eighteen months later , and have a daughter , . By this time , the couple is constantly bickering over 's antics . He slept through the night calling the name " " . We see she is a hooker who pulled a lit candle out of 's ass during sex and poured the hot wax on his back as he kept screaming " Wolfie " ( his safety word , which she ignores ) . tells us this fighting is part of their routine , which ends with them getting intimate . When they put the baby to sleep , says she is wearing short skirts from now on and wo n't be wearing panties deliberately to tease . however , has his own trick to pull ; he tells that she 's been videotaped by 's security guards , both of whom are named . At work , it is the day of an IPO ( initial public offering ) meeting with , a ladies shoe designer seeking to go public with his company . catches a geeky broker cleaning his goldfish bowl . He sends to call the guy out and humiliate him in front of everybody by swallowing the man 's goldfish whole and then sending him out while everybody else jeers at him . ( ) presents his latest product , the ( which one broker says look like fat woman shoes ) . The brokers start throwing junk at him , which stops . He wants to join them in business , which he agrees to . then gets up to the stage to give a speech to the whole floor about the wonders of being rich . The stock is launched in the trading room and becomes a success , netting $ 22 million in just three hours . The sends the company a subpoena to request 's wedding video tape . meets his private investigator , ( playing himself ) where tells him that has pictures of 's inner circle . asks if it 's possible to buy off -- emphatically says ' no' . A few days later , invites and his partner ( ) onto the moored at a harbor . He shows them the list of everybody in attendance to the wedding . When tells of an employee of his that he hired after needing money for his mother 's triple bypass surgery , interprets this as some sort of bribe . laughs it off and sends the agents off his yacht . He mockingly throws 100 dollar bills at them as they walk away . decides to keep his money safe from the tax men as well as thieves by storing it in offshore accounts . He , , and go to to get the job done . The trip there is chaotic for since he takes a bunch of quaaludes prior to the flight . He then behaves very lewdly toward the stewardess and he insults the pilot . He wakes up strapped to his chair . tells that he tried to start a riotous party on the airplane , dry - humping the female flight attendants and insulting the plane 's captain , who personally restrained in his seat . Due to 's intervention , with assistance from his Swiss friend , is n't charged upon his arrival . The trio meets with a group of French Swiss bankers led by ( ) , 's friend in college . persuades them to get someone outside the to store money in their account . travels to , to convince 's to take some of his fortune . This also leads to unsuccessfully trying to hit on her . They also use 's wife ( ) to smuggle money in with her family , though she can only strap a certain amount to her body to smuggle into . and get into an argument that ends with punching out . Some time later , drives out to a seedy strip mall to make an exchange with . had specifically asked to make sure did n't arrive at the meeting drugged out , but appears to be anyway . After a few moments , reveals that he is n't actually stoned for the meeting and begins to provoke -- had taken very personally the fact that had hit him . They get into another argument with the cops watching nearby . drops his briefcase of money and flees , leaving to get arrested . shows up at 's house with a strong brand of quaaludes called 714 , a very rare version of the drug . The two take a pill each and watch " " on the TV , but feel no effects after 35 minutes . They take more and still feel nothing . They find out that they expired in 1981 . ( pregnant again ) goes downstairs to find the two working out . She tells that is on the line . tells to leave his house and call him from a payphone . drives a mile down the road to a country club to use the payphone there . tells him about getting arrested , and that has 's home and work phones tapped . Just then , starts to finally feel the effects of the -- the pills were so far past their expiration date they 'd developed a " delayed fuse . " He starts slurring his speech and then collapses to the floor , unable to stand or walk . He crawls outside , rolls down the steps , and manages to open the door of his with his foot . calls him to say that is acting very strangely and had called . makes an attempt to drive his car home despite being too high . He slowly manages to get home safely and crawls his way to the kitchen to pull ( who is also feeling the delayed effect of the quaaludes ) off the phone , yelling as best as he can about the listening in . runs to stuff cold cuts in his mouth , but he starts choking and falls on top of the glass dining table , shattering it . Naomi runs in to find turning blue and choking . grabs a little vial of from a drawer and pours the whole thing into his nose ( juxtaposed with a cartoon as feeds the sailor man some spinach , with the tune accompanying and the coke ) . He pulls the food out of 's mouth and begins to apply a crude form of the . pauses for a few seconds , thinking he 'll let die , until reminds him that has a family . finally gets to cough up the food he was choking on . wakes up the next morning to find the police in his house . They arrest him when they show him his , with notable damage , despite believing he got the car home in one piece . A flashback shows us that did n't make it home without damaging his car , hitting several other cars , a few golf carts and a mailbox . He is released after it 's determined they have no proof was ever behind the wheel of the car . and tell he got lucky . Another few months later , holds a big meeting on his floor to announce that he is stepping down from the company to pass it onto , , and . He calls out one woman for starting at with " barely two nickels to rub together " , and now living rich when decided to give her a shot . He tells the brokers he loves all of them , moving them to tears . then changes his mind and decides to stay , leading to cheers . He gets everybody to join him in the " . " His father is not pleased , believing would be better off in taking the deal the was offering . holds a huge celebration on his yacht , right after is released from jail . subsequently quits doing business in stocks , and tells us he died of a heart attack two years later . In 1996 , and take their wives to , to continue the celebration . Rugrat calls then while they 're drinking and snorting cocaine to tell them that is unloading shares after hearing about 's recent trouble with the law . To make matters worse , comes crying to tell that died of a heart attack . is distraught , but more due to the fact that this leaves the $ 20 million in her account inaccessible . calls , who tells him that named the successor to the money . He just needs to get to immediately . runs to tell the captain to take them to , despite 's insistence that they go to for the funeral . believes they can reach a safe harbor and that he can catch a small plane to . The captain warns that there may be stormy seas ahead , but does n't care . Indeed , they do sail right into dangerous waters . orders to run and get more quaaludes , even as objects -- does n't want to die sober . He runs downstairs anyway and brings the drugs up , just as a huge wave breaks through boat and turns it over . The group is rescued by a Italian helicopter called in by . They 're taken on another boat , and sees the jet he wanted to catch crash into the ocean . He tells us this was due to a seagull flying into the engine . He believes this to be a sign from . Two years later , is sobered up . He is seen in an infomercial advertising his moneymaking seminar , . During a taping of the infomercial , and other agents arrest . had been arrested in for crimes unrelated to , and he ended up ratting him out while having dinner with ( who is also arrested ) . had also been having an affair with 's wife whenever she smuggled cash to him in . All the members of are called in for testimony but refuse to give anybody up to save themselves . goes over to 's place as he is under house arrest , he wears a locator on his right ankle . He says he 's got 's back in the scheme of things . He also asks how sober life is . thinks it sucks . is also furious with , refusing to speak to him . and his lawyer meet with and two other of lawyers . They try to make a deal in which wears a wire to incriminate the other co - conspirators . They call the case a " " in reference to the invasion of in the , where the government very easily suppressed an invasion of that island nation by . To them , the case will be easy for the of to win because of the overwhelming amount of evidence they 've collected . A few nights later , pesters for sex , and she eventually gives in and asks him to make love " as if it were the last time . " Naomi acts passive and uninterested . Once the two are finished , she tells him it really was the last time ; she intends to file for divorce , and tells that unless he agrees to every condition that she demands ( a quick divorce , full custody of their two kids and half of his remaining wealth ) , she 'll take out a restraining order that will bar from ever contacting her or the kids again . becomes enraged and insults her ; she slaps him and he hits her in the abdomen . He storms into a small sitting room and cuts open one of the sofa cushions , removing a bag of cocaine . He snorts a good - sized amount and runs into 's room taking from her bed . Over 's panicked protests , he runs downstairs to leave with . and the ' maid try to stop as he reverses the car out of the garage , but he ends up crashing into a wall just a few yards away . is unharmed as she was wearing her seat belt , but suffers a minor head injury . takes out of the car , as a dazed gradually realizes he will probably never see his two daughters again after this latest incident . is set up with the wire to bring in his partners . They all cheer for him upon his return . He goes to start with . slides him a note that says " Do n't incriminate yourself . I 'm wearing a wire . " When he asks about their financial practices , pretends not to remember anything . The arrive at 's house to arrest him when they discover the note he slipped to ( though not shown , the note was given to by himself , likely as part of a deal that will leave unaffected or facing lesser charges ) . While rapidly deletes any incriminating files on his office computer the rest of the co - conspirators are arrested in the office . In court , is sentenced to 36 months in prison . His mother cries as her son is taken away while looks at him disappointed . When he arrives at prison , admits that he was terrified when he got there . For a fleeting moment , he says , he forgot that he was rich . He had become so accustomed to a life where everything was for sale . The final scene takes place at a seminar in , ( The host is played by the real ) . comes out to the crowd and stands before one man . He pulls out a pen and tells him to sell it to him . The man awkwardly starts his pitch before takes the pen away . He hands it to another , who is equally awkward . continues to do the same with more guests , as all the hopeful future millionaires watch him.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > , 1962Tony " " ( ) is a doorman and peacekeeper / bouncer at the nightclub . He 's known as because he 's an amazing " bullshitter " - getting people to do what they do n't want to . He does what he has to to put food on his family 's table . When two men start getting into a fist fight , he tosses one out onto the street and gives him a few punches in the face when he resists . He pays the coat check girl to take a rich patron 's prized hat so he can " find " it and return it to him for a very big tip . The club closes for a few months for renovations , leaving out of work . He and his wife , ( ) , are having trouble making the rent and keeping a roof over their two kids ' home . When two black men come over to repair the sink , gives them lemonade - and throws out their glasses after they use them , much to 's disappointment at her husband 's racial views . makes fifty bucks in a hot dog eating contest to make ends meet . An old contact gets him an interview to be a driver for a doctor , and he goes to for the interview . He mistakenly goes to the venue , but learns there 's an apartment upstairs . It 's ornate and filled with objects around the world . ( ) . He 's not a medical doctor , but a concert pianist . He 's doing a concert tour going from the into the deep south , and needs a driver because does not have a drivers license . has asked around specifically for someone who could handle trouble - he knows there 's going to be racism against him . The tour is two months long , and ends right before . He asks if he can be away from his family that long , and agrees for the right money . But when insists that be prepared to iron his clothes and shine his shoes , refuses , saying he 's not a butler . dismisses him . goes to a bar , upset he fumbled the interview , and a couple of mobsters he knows from the club offer him unsavory work . He declines , lying that he 's got money saved . Early the next morning , calls 's house and asks to speak to . He asks her if she 's okay with her husband being gone for so long . When she agrees , he offers the job . Dolores asks to write her letters , much to his chagrin . The record company rents a nice car , and gives him half the money up front , and tells him he 'll get half at the end of the tour - if misses a show , he wo n't get the money . They also give him the ' ' , a tourist guide and list of safe places for black people to stay in the segregated southern states . is a loudmouth and a talker , and gets on 's nerves a lot during the drive . As they approach their first tour stop , suggests that use a different last name and try to talk better around the guests , but says if they have a problem with how he talks , he 'll wait outside , which he does . From outside he watches play piano and is impressed with how brilliant he is . Afterwards , he gambles with the other help who are all also outside , and is upset with him for being so low - class . wants to know why is giving him such a hard time and no one else - and says it 's because unlike the other help , had the option of being inside . In the car , plays contemporary music on the radio and is shocked when does n't know popular music like . He questions if is even black , and when he drives by a and finds out has never had fried chicken , he stops . He playfully forces to try the chicken . works on his letters for , and they 're terrible , so helps him make them more poetic and beautiful . At a later stop , finds a gemstone that 's being sold on the ground and pockets it , but forces him to put it back , saying it 's stealing even though disagrees . As they enter the south , has to stay at blacks only hotels separate from . Alone at one motel , drinks by himself , alienated from the other black people at the hotel . gets a call at his room that there 's a skirmish happening at a local bar , where he finds being assaulted by racist white patrons . reaches for a gun and claims he 'll shoot if they do n't let him go . They narrowly escape , and asks if he really has a gun . says of course not , and orders to go nowhere without him . At the next concert venue at a mansion , the host is very friendly to . For dinner he has had the cooks prepared fried chicken . At intermission , asks to use the bathroom , and the host directs him to the outhouse , not allowing him to use the inside bathroom . refuses to use the outhouse , so drives him back to his hotel just to use the bathroom there . At the next stop , the two walk by a suit store , and when admires a suit in the window , insists he buy it . When they enter the store , the racist employees refuse to sell a suit . That evening , is called to a disturbance at a local YMCA where and another local white man have been arrested - apparently the gym manager caught them in a fistfight . bribes the police officers to let go . At the next town , runs into the mobsters . In , in front of , they tell that he should quit and come work for them . agrees to meet them for a drink later that night . As they check into their hotel , offers a raise and a promotion . refuses to accept , and reveals he speaks Italian . explains he was never going to take the job , he was going to meet them and tell them now . is relieved . He awkwardly apologizes to for the situation the night before , but explains that he 's been working in nightclubs for years and knows that the world is " complicated" . continues to help with writing the letters , which continue to impress Dolores and the rest of his family . One night while on their way to their final stop somewhere in , they are pulled over by the local police . The redneck officer tells them that ca n't be out past sundown ( in part due to the town they are in being a ... where all black people are under curfew ) . They are both forced out of the car and frisked , and the officer asks for his , who shows the officer his driver 's license . When the officer asks what kind of last name is , says it 's Italian , but that he 's only half - Italian . The racist police officer insults by calling him " half a nigger " . immediately punches the redneck officer in the face , and both him and are arrested and taken to jail . In their cell , is enraged at , since his hot head cost them the tour . demands to make a phone call , since he committed no crime . The police allow him to . A short while later , the police receive an angry call from the and reluctantly release both and . reveals to that he called the . thinks that 's amazing , but is furious . He is embarrassed that someone so important now sees him as a rabble - rouser . The two men have a huge argument over all their differences - sees as a man who refuses to better himself , and sees as a man who seems to make things more difficult for himself and fits in nowhere . screams at , " if I 'm not black enough , and I 'm not white enough , I 'm not man enough , then what am two arrive at the final concert venue at another hotel , where is shown to a tiny closet that they refer to as his dressing room . goes to eat in the dining room with the players in the band , but when arrives to join them , the concierge refuses to let him eat there . refuses to play unless he is able to eat in the dining room . The concierge wo n't allow it , and pulls him aside to talk to him . tries to reason with him , but the concierge tries to bribe him to get to play . enters , and tells he 'll do the show if wants , knowing wo n't get paid unless they finish the tour . But sticks with , and they bail on the gig despite the screams of the concierge . They go down the street to a bar for black people . buys a round of drinks , flashing his wallet filled with money , which a couple of black youths see . After some prodding , plays piano with the jazz band . When they leave , spots the two youths waiting behind their car to mug them , and fires two shots off into the air to scare them away ... revealing he did have a gun all along . and begin their drive back to , hoping to make it by . The weather is really bad , with a lot of snow . They get pulled over again , but this time the cop just warns them their tire is skidding . ca n't stay awake any longer and can barely see through the snow , and accepts he wo n't make it home and goes to sleep - but while he sleeps drives them the rest of the way to 's apartment . He wakes up and encourages him to go home - invites him but he declines . goes upstairs and surprises his family . returns to his ornate apartment , and sits there alone . He ends up coming to 's , and while most of his family is a little confused , joyously welcomes him and thanks him for helping with his letters . The post - script reveals that in real life , became the of the , and continued being successful in music . They remained friends for the rest of their > 

 < synopsis > ( ) arrives in in 1948 to preside over the trial of four judges , each charged with having abused the court system to help cleanse of the politically and socially undesirable , allegedly guilty of war crimes . The opening statement of the prosecuting attorney ( ) is a vicious one , depicting the defendants as having been willing , evil , accomplices in atrocities , but wonders if it is really that simple . Confounded at how one defendant , a renowned German champion of justice named ( ) , appears to have played the greatest role in molding 's of into a destructive instrument of , resolves to gain some perspective on the period in which the German legal system strayed from a course of entirely objective justice . Probing for the truth proves difficult , though , as nobody who lived in during seems to admit to having much inside knowledge . He befriends ( ) , the widow of an executed army officer , but she offers few insights , more consumed by her personal experiences than the broader matters of . is focusing on being a catalyst for the cultural rebirth of , keen on remolding the image of a city that had become notorious as the site of the raliies . An attempt to discuss the period with his housekeepers , and , who had lived near the concentration camp , proves equally fruitless for , as they can not help but focus on the loss of their child in the bombing and the fact that they nearly starved from poverty . Whether anyone knew anything mattered little , for were looking forward , not backward , still grappling with , and recovering from , the hardships and losses that the war brought to them and their families . Only in the courtroom will have the opportunity to gain insights into the realities of the period . First hand evidence of a ) all German judges having sworn to a oath of allegiance , b ) human sterilization orders signed by the defendants and carried out , and c ) the execution of a merely for having relations with a non - , painted an evil picture of the ways in which the law had been applied by the defendants during . Still , can not fully come to grips with why these judges had been willing to enforce the law in such a horrific manner . Not , at least , until the defendant feels compelled to make a statement , against the advice of his counsel ( ) .In his statement made under oath , speaks of how economically - stricken had become a nation of fearful , desperate people , and how only such a people could submit to . 's promises , explained , in which he openly vowed the elimination of those accountable for 's hardships were , at first , soothing and reassuring to them . then noted that , even once the complicit realized the unconscionability and inhumanity of 's approach , they stayed at their posts to help things from getting even worse , but , predictably , failed to derail the atrocities of the times . He explained that national allegiance had motivated most of them to the point that they sacrificed their own personal senses of morality . In a deeply personal , yet self - damning , statement , he conceded that most of them should have known better , and that those that had gone along had betrayed . At long last , the issue at the heart of the case becomes clear to - the choice that the defendants had to make was between allegiance to their country and allegiance to their own senses of right and wrong . Understanding the times and context in which the actions of the defendants took place , is ready to pass judgment on the defendants . He sentences each to life imprisonment , noting that their actions were illegal under both International law and German law , and further notes that they were men of sufficient intellect , prominence and credibility in that their refusal to help transform the German court system into an institution that , systematically , denied justice to enemies of the might have made a difference . As noted in the closing moments of the film , none of those condemned to a sentence less than death at any of the trials was still serving their term just over a decade later . Once became a ally of , it gradually opened the door for their release.</synopsis > 

 < 's treatment of , with three sons dealing with the passing of an era as their warlord father ( ) tries to find peace in his last years by dividing his fief among them . While one honest son , ( ) , faces his family 's wrath for speaking the truth , his two brothers , ( ) and ( ) vie for power in the vacuum left by 's retirement . While the ( ) makes wise commentary , discovers for himself the madness caused by his thirst for power , and tries to find redemption for his deadly past.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > 's 1995 film follows the life of " " ( ) as he runs the mob - owned casino . The movie also deals with his relationship with his friend ( ) and the love of his life ( and its boss , ( ) , order ( ) , the head of the ' , to give real estate hustler ( ) more than $ 60,000,000 to fund the . While in the public eye , is the president , he however , also takes orders from . Each month , the sends ( ) over to to the casino to " " millions from the casino 's winnings with the help of the men in the counting room . Nance then makes the trip to once a month where he meets the Outfit bosses in a grocery store run by ( ) , the underboss . That 's where the bosses collect their money since it would be illegal for them to be any closer to itself . The bosses want to run the casino due to his great reputation as a gambling handicapper . Reluctant at first , eventually agrees . For help , has his old casino friend ( ) hired as the casino manager . The bosses send , 's childhood friend , and 's right - hand man ( ) over to watch over and to make sure the goes alright . While is kind - hearted , is a volatile and dangerous psychopath who will kill anyone he sees as a threat . After a man insults , takes his pen and stabs him in the neck repeatedly . also shows his cold - hearted side when he catches two cheaters and has a guard take one 's hand and smash it multiple times with a hammer . 's life takes a turn when he falls in love with , a hustler who works the casinos . Ace narrates that the only thing in her life she could n't control was her pimp boyfriend ( ) . But still convinces her to have his baby , , and to marry him . All is well at the wedding , until catches crying and talking to on the phone , telling him that she still loves him . She tells that 's just an old friend and is convinced that part of her life is over . To fulfil his promise to her , that if the marriage did n't work she 'd still be okay money - wise , buys her around a million dollars worth of jewelry and also travels to where he puts $ 2 million away for ransom in a safety deposit box . He gives the only key to , putting all his trust into her . While is running the casino , is performing his own line of work . He starts hustling and shaking down bookies and forms a crew in the casinos to rip them off . Ace catches on to him and tells him to be careful , that gaming agents are all over him . ignores him , and by doing that , gets himself put into the " black book , " banning him from all casinos in . decides on another way to make a living . He brings over his brother and some old friends for his crew . He opens up his own jewelry store , the , but at night , performs burglaries in both houses and stores . He also places some of the money in some legitimate businesses , like his restaurant , run by . Every couple of weeks he send of to the bosses with a small piece of what he makes in order to keep them happy . He also performs jobs for the bosses , like killing a couple of men who shot up one of 's diners . At the , fires floor manager after a possible scam that he did n't detect . While begs to let him have his job back , being that he 's the 's brother - in - law , does n't back down . The himself comes in to ask for to reconsider , but still stands by his decision . The states that its a bad decision for and then leaves . Back at home , problems are already starting between and . asks for $ 25,000 and gets defensive when asks why . has follow her to the bank where she withdraws her money . She then goes to a restaurant where she meets and gives him the money . then enters and sits down with them , telling to stay away from her . then takes outside where she sees 's hotel men severely beating , while watches . later goes to asking why had to do that . states the loves her very much and she should try working it out with him . also wants her to cut down on her drinking and drug abuse and get some help , for 's sake . Ginger agrees . Despite all the problems , the money in the counting room keeps going to the bosses successfully . The , however , finds out that some of the men in the counting room have been skimming the itself . When they confront about it , he says he wants them to go easy on his men . Unconvinced , the bosses send over to make sure no one rips them off . , however , starts complaining about his trips to , claiming it 's money coming out of his pocket . Things are n't any better in , when an old partner of ( whom he never told anyone about ) comes into the picture and demands some money from the . When stalls her , she takes her case to court . The outcome of the court hearing is that must open the books and show where he got the funding . , furious over the outcome , sends to take her out of the picture . The police start looking at as well ( although he had no knowledge of the murder).Due to the problems with , now starts giving interviews stating that he runs the casino only when is absent . A magazine publisher takes it out of context , bringing up the fact that does n't own a gaming license . The media starts speculating whether 's friendship with could affect his license hearing , although he was promised a fair one from the senator . After threatens 's banker , tells him that he needs to calm down with the way he 's been doing things . The bosses also agree , tells to tell to handle things quieter . starts showing his contempt for the and starts getting aggravated with . He also starts figuring out ways to throw off the detectives who have constant surveillance on him , such as radar and switching cars multiple times . realizes what really intends to do ; overthrow and take control of everything . Back in , is once again complaining about another trip he has to take to to his brother - in - law and his mother ' claiming it will cost him more out of his own pocket . Despite the bosses warnings not to do it , starts keeping records of his trips , including names , dates , and addresses . He also expresses his belief that and the guys in the counting room are ripping them off . What he does n't know is that the has an old wire on the store involving an old homicide and has been collecting evidence in their investigation of the . At 's license hearing , the senator drops a bombshell motion denying his license , despite his promise of a fair hearing . The had apparently pulled some strings . After arguing and yelling at the senator , who denies any contact with , is taken away by his associates and lawyers ; he is now out of gaming . While wondering what to do with , suggests to that he could run the casino with a different job title . agrees , as long as its quiet , such as the manager of food and beverages . does the complete opposite . He sets up a TV talk show " " where he has celebrity guests and he frequently talks about his lawsuit with the gaming board regarding his license . Everyone is upset with him , and tells to tell that he should probably quit . During their meeting , defends his actions saying that with the TV show making his image and plight more public , he 'll be eventually be issued his gaming license . also complains that his biggest problem is , stating that 's relentless wild behavior has brought way too much heat on him and suggests that he takes some time off . When tells what said , meets out in the desert , where he furiously tells him never to talk behind his back again . The two are so angry at each other that when sees , , and at a restaurant , he pretends he does n't know him . Out of spite , shows up at the , despite being banned , acting hostile toward a dealer . After tells to hurry up and get out , loses his temper again , this time , on . calls a prick and beats him with a telephone receiver . has now had enough of and files for divorce , asking for alimony and custody of . does n't want her to leave , stating that she 's an alcoholic , that she 'll just blow the money away , and that he does n't trust her with . decides to send and away for a week to go shopping . When he tries to call her , he realizes she 's with again and the two are planning to kidnap and fly to . Both and have changed their appearances and is now addicted to cocaine . calls , demanding that be returned to him . Ginger is now terrified that will send someone to kill them and calls , who tells her not to worry . tells that wants to come back but that she 's scared . decides to take her back . He , however , is furious at for almost kidnapping and giving $ 25,000 for suits and a watch . That night , he hears her asking someone over the phone to kill him . , he grabs her , gives her some money and clothes , and throws her out of the house . She comes back , and reveals that he still loves her . He makes her wear a beeper so that he knows where she is at all times . She goes to talk to , asking him if he can help get her her money . The two then start an affair , which undercover cops take pictures of . After comes to know of the affair , he warns her that she needs to end it , or it could get all three of them killed . But she still continues the affair , despite giving her the same warning . When flies out to again , asks him whether he knows if 's sleeping with 's wife . Marino narrates that he knew it could get , , and killed if he told the truth . So he lies , even though he puts himself in danger as well . By now , and his crew have become coke addicts and alcoholics , affecting the way they work . They start acting even more recklessly ; they shoot up a cop 's home after the police killed one of their members . is also worried that will go to and tell him about the affair . Even though he has n't made up his mind , tells to start getting ready to have killed , if it comes to that . One night , calls his home from the casino , but no one answers . When he gets home , he finds his daughter tied to her bedposts , by . He finds out she 's at 's restaurant and quickly goes there . He goes to her table and warns her if she ever abuses again he 'll kill her . They go home where they argue some more , only to have return to 's . They argue in the back of the restaurant , and asks to have killed . says no , that he 's been 's friend for 35 years . is more worried that the bosses are going to find out . In a fit of rage , Ginger attacks , and after being slapped a couple of times , is literally thrown out by and . calls and asks him to come over to his house with his gun , fearing for his life . The next morning , arrives at the house hysterically screaming and smashing 's car with her own . She threatens to call the on everyone and causes such a scene that the police arrive . The police ask if can be let into the house to collect some personal items ; says he 'll let her when she calms down . One of the cops escorts inside . Ginger breaks into 's desk and steals his safe - deposit box key . She drives to the bank and takes most of the money , despite 's request that she does n't . She drives off , only to be pulled over and arrested for aiding and abetting by the undercover officers watching them . Even though she does n't talk , the have no need for , they have everything they need . While had skipped town , the executes search warrants on his house and the , arresting , , and the rest of the crew . The seize the casino and start going through the books . admits he was being extorted and is willing to cooperate . While going through 's house , the feds find his record books , giving them all they need . becomes so upset that he drops dead in front of them from a heart attack . They even show the pictures of and , but does n't want to look at them . The is indicted with skimming the casino and they decide to murder anyone who can incriminate them . They reluctantly kill in fear that he may talk , although states their main motive is that he was n't Italian . is also killed while hiding from the in ( 's son had been busted for drugs , and the bosses were afraid he 'd come out of hiding to aid his son . ) Also on the Outfit 's hitlist are two of the men from the counting room . The list of victims expands greatly and the murders pile up over a period of weeks . After left , found out she 'd hooked up with some lowlifes and blew through all the money and jewels . She later is found dead from a cocaine overdose ; following the initial report by the coroner , has a friend of his conduct a private investigation & finds out may have been given a " hot dose " . Ace himself is nearly killed by a car bomb , depicted in the opening scene . While the media believes it was orchestrated by the bosses , believes that is somehow involved since a steel plate under the driver 's seat protected him from the worst of the explosion . However , never gets the chance to question ; by now , the bosses have had enough of him . The combination of being barred from the casinos , the police attention he brought from his murders and burglaries , and him sleeping with a married - man 's wife against the " made - man " code are all too much for the bosses to handle . They have 's crew meet him in a remote cornfield after they posted bail . After saying hello to them , they hold him down as they beat with bats . leads the beating , saying he 's had enough of them . They beat until he 's knocked out , then they strip him and throw him into a shallow grave . They then proceed to beat . Ace narrates that they buried them while they were still breathing . states that the has been demolished , and that no longer has a friendly feeling to it any more . Most of the old casinos are demolished along with the to make way for newer , larger and more modern casinos and hotels . Ace laments that the old tradition of casinos being friendlier places to gamble and do business vanished almost overnight and that junk bonds paid for the newer ones . However , is still able to return to his old job as a sports handicapper for the mob.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) is an insurance salesman leading an idyllic , peaceful life on . also happens to be the star of the most popular live show in television history . The only problem is , he does n't know it ! In fact , the entire island of is a complete fabrication ; a massive set surrounded by a protective dome that produces the most sophisticated effects and imagery to mimic the sky , weather , and temperature of the real world . Set just off of what appears to be the coast of , the dome is run by a massive staff hidden just beyond its barriers and managed by the artistically eccentric Director , ( ) . has filmed since just before his birth and sees the project as a ray of hope ; a way to truthfully portray a person 's life nonstop while maintaining their innocence . It is on 10,909 of 's life that things begin to change . As he 's getting ready for work , he greets his neighbors across the street ( , , and ) , with his traditional greeting of , " Good morning ! And in case I do n't see you , good afternoon , good evening , and good night " , before a mysterious object falls from the sky and lands near his car . When looks up , however , the sky is clear and offers no explanation for the object , which we can see is obviously a studio light . As he drives to work , the radio reports that an aircraft flying over the island shed parts which leads to believe that was the source of the fallen object . At work , discreetly tears pieces of paper out of a magazine and stows them away before making a call asking for directory information to . He asks for a or . When neither of the names bears results he hangs up just as his boss , ( ) , approaches and asks him to close a deal on . Reluctantly , Truman leaves but once he reaches the pier he is forced to return to work due to his fear of open water . At home spends some time gardening before his wife , ( ) , returns from work with a chipper smile on her face . Afterwards , visits with his long time friend , ( ) , real name , where he confides the wish to leave , quit his job , and travel to , echoing a childhood wish to explore ( despite his teacher 's ( ) attempts to dissuade him by informing him that there was nothing left in the world to discover ) . Marlon feigns ignorance and says that he does n't even know where is . That evening , sits alone on the beach looking out towards the water . He remembers a boating trip he took with his father ( ) as a child ( ) and requesting that they stay out at sea for just a bit longer . Though his father wanted to go back to shore , he complied . Shortly after , a strong storm hit and 's father was swept overboard and drowned . As he comes out of the memory it begins to rain on ... and just on . When he realizes this , he stands up in shock as the rest of the sky finally opens up in a downpour , prompting him to rush home . He tells about his plans to go to but she dismisses the idea , saying that their financial obligations are much more important . When he argues that it could be an adventure she counters by asking if having a baby would be a good adventure . She then suggests they go to bed . The following morning , as drives to work , he spots a homeless man on the street . Looking closely he realizes that the man looks just like his father . Before he can get to the man , however , a number of people and strange obstacles spontaneously appear and the homeless man is taken away . Later that day , questions his mother ( ) about this over the phone but she refuses to believe any of it and dismisses the idea as wishful thinking . That night , retreats to the basement of his home where he begins to look through an old trunk filled with his personal mementos . He spies a red sweater with a white pin that says ' How will it end ? ' His memories bring him back to college where he and are in the homecoming band . has his eye on an attractive young woman across the courtyard but is distracted when shows up . Over the next month or so , is inseparable from until one evening when he is in the library studying . He looks up and sees the young woman from the courtyard whom he 'd been admiring . He approaches her and learns that her name is ( ) but she tells him that she 's not allowed to speak with him . Despite this , asks if she 'd like to go out with him sometime . She takes out a small piece of paper , writes quickly , and hands it to . It says one word , ' now ' . The two secretly rush out of the library . The cameras around the room lose them for a second but manage to spy them running out a nearby exit . and run towards the beach where they are able to share a moment of privacy . However , a vehicle approaches and becomes frantic . She tells that her real name is actually and tries to tell him the truth about the show as her ' father ' appears on the dunes and calls for her . He comes down to collect her and tells that she 's delusional before announcing that they are moving to . can only watch in puzzlement as they drive off , never to return . In the aftermath , finds the red sweater that / left behind . As he returns from his memory , takes the scraps of magazine that he 'd been tearing out at work and reveals that he 's been compiling a collage of a woman 's face ; / 's face as he remembers it . The next day , as he drives to work , the radio in 's car begins to strangely broadcast every movement he makes , which are actually remarks from crew members observing him . Growing increasingly paranoid , opts to walk around in the open air outside . He parks and ducks into a building . He makes his way towards the elevator and , as the doors open , is surprised to see , not an empty car , but an entrance to what seems to be a studio filled with people wearing headphones and eating sandwiches - the actors ' break room . Before he can register what he 's seeing , security grabs him and pushes him out of the building for trespassing . Confused , walks to a nearby market where he sees 's service vehicle parked . tries to explain to what he just experienced but passes it off as trying to be funny . pulls aside and tells him that he 's his best friend and needs to confide that he 's going to be going away for a while . When he returns home , finds and his mother looking at photos in an old album . They show him and look on together as the TV begins to play an old film called ' Show Me the Way to Go Home ' , a clear attempt to reassure the notion of never leaving home . As looks back at the photo album , his eyes fall on a picture of his wedding day with . Looking closer , he sees that her fingers are crossed which implies that did not marry truthfully . goes to a travel agency the next day to book a flight to but the agent ( ) tells him that there are no available flights for at least a month . When he tries to take a bus to , the bus breaks down before it can leave the station . When comes home from work , she finds sitting in his car in the driveway , fixated on something . She goes to the car and sits with him but he tells her to be silent before predicting the appearance of every person along the street ; as if they were on a fixed schedule - specifically , a lady on a red bike , a man with flowers , and a vintage beetle with a dented fender . tells him that his behavior is worrying but he decides to put his theory to a bigger test . He drives off down the street with who demands that they return home . When they come to a rotary , a traffic jam suddenly appears . feigns disappointment and takes the car around the rotary multiple times . When he comes back to the blocked road all the cars have vanished and he continues towards the only bridge that leads off the island . However , is forced to stop at the bridge when he realizes that he ca n't drive over because of his fear of water . Instead , he closes his eyes and slams his foot on the gas , forcing to drive . Victorious , cries out as continues to try and convince him to return home . They pass a sign warning of forest fires and a line of flames shoots across the road , but drives onward . The car is finally stopped just beyond a power plant that appears to have experienced a meltdown . Men in hazmat suits approach the car and apologize for the inconvenience but when one of them accidentally calls by his first name ( they would of course not know otherwise ) gets out of the car and attempts to make a break for it . The men chase after him and manage to capture him and return him to the island . Once home , tries to console a dejected by offering him a new drink she picked up . However , she promotes the item as if on a commercial which prompts to ask who she thinks she 's talking to . becomes upset and blames 's recent behavior but becomes more frantic and tries to convince that there 's something wrong with everything . Becoming scared , takes a peeler and aims it at , telling him to keep his distance . When he grabs it away from her and puts her in a lock hold she calls out for ' someone ' to stop him . , in shock , releases her and demands to know what 's going on . appears at the door and walks in with a case of beer , as if to casually hang out , and runs into his arms , crying that ' it 's not professional' . takes out where they sit at the edge of a road , sharing the beers . Marlon tries to assure that , if everyone was in on a massive scheme or conspiracy , he 'd have to be in on it too . He tells that the last thing he would ever want to do is lie to him , though in reality , he 's saying this as feeds him his words through an earpiece . then tells the real reason he stopped by and took him out tonight . They stand and look behind them where a dark figure emerges from the mist . tells that he was able to find the homeless man he 'd seen and , as the man gets closer , realizes that it is his father . The two embrace while composes the cinematography from above and revels in his master shot of weeping with happiness . 's father promises to make up for all the lost years . Shortly after this moment a weekly TV show titled ' ' begins while a smaller screen in the right - hand corner of the television shows as he eats his breakfast . is interviewed and he explains the reasoning behind many things that have happened on the show . The purpose of ' killing ' his father out at sea was to implant the fear of water in so that he would have no wish of leaving the island . This decision was reinforced by his youthful wishes to explore and discover which often nearly led him to discover his own captivity . Bringing his father back now was done with the hopes to quell 's emotional turmoil and soothe him into remaining on the island despite all that 's happened . Various security measures were taken in light of a few occurrences , one of which involved a fan ( ) hiding himself in a present of 's when he was a child in order to get air - time . A caller rings in and accepts to answer questions . He recognizes 's voice as she berates for keeping up the charade and imprisoning within a mockery of life . Christof counters by saying that the real world is a prison and that what he has done is to actually give the chance to lead a completely normal life , free of violence or pain and says that , should discover the truth , he could leave . The following day , appears to be well and back to his normal self . He greets his neighbors and heads off to work where he meets a new coworker named ( 's appointed replacement as 's prospective female partner ) . That evening , moves some things around his basement , appearing to reorganize , before pulling on some covers on a makeshift bed and falling asleep . After several hours of inactivity , even when should be awake , becomes suspicious while watching the video feed . He orders that the phone ring in the house . When does n't answer , much less move , sends over , cueing him the entire time as to what to do . Marlon goes into the basement and pulls 's covers back to find a noise recorder and a gaping hole in the basement floor . At a loss of what to do or say , does the unthinkable ; he cuts the transmission . The cease in transmission puts the world into a state of shock and orders the entire staff on the island to form search parties . Performing a - like move over the set , commands the sun to rise to aid in the search . When the search on land has been exhausted , suggests an impossible idea ; search at sea . His intuition proves correct as pan over the ocean and locate a lone sailboat with at the helm . The live video feeds continue and orders one of the actors to go out and fetch . However , being actors , none of them know how to man a boat . utilizes his weather program to simulate a storm to entice to go back to port . However , battens down and yells to the skies in defiance . Angry , increases the wind and turbulence , nearly causing to fall overboard . Knowing that will never back down , pull the plug on the weather . continues sailing , victorious , until the boat is rocked by a strong impact . collects himself and finds that the bow of the ship has lodged into ... the sky . He has come to the end of the dome . He gets off of the boat and examines the wall , following it a short ways until he finds a short staircase leading to an exit door . As he reaches for the handle , speaks on the intercom system to directly for the first time . He introduces himself as the creator who has been watching since the day he was born and revealing his life as entertainment for a world beyond . tries to convince to stay within his world where he can live happily and without suffering or pain and tries to plant the idea that is still deathly afraid of continuing on . appears deep in thought and suggests that he say something . After all , the entire world is watching . looks up and says , " In case I do n't see you , good afternoon , good evening , and good night . " He bows as looks on incredulously , opens the door , and leaves . An elated jumps up from her living room floor and leaves her apartment as the rest of the world cheers tremendously at the finale of the . A saddened but resolute removes his head piece and cuts the transmission.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > An unseen narrator ( 's voiceover ) tells of an underground kingdom that was devoid of lies or pain . Long ago , the young princess of the realm escaped , curious to see the world above , but was blinded by the bright sunlight and all memories of her past were erased . She eventually succumbed to the natural world as her inability to adapt to her new surroundings left her helpless . Her father , the , remained hopeful that his daughter would return to her kingdom someday , in another place and time . ; 1944 . The Spanish has been over for five years but small groups of guerrilla rebels continue to fight against the new fascist dictatorship led by . Ten - year - old ( ) , a quiet lover of books and fairy tales , is travelling with her mother , ( ) , to the rural village of where 's new husband , ( ) , an officer of 's army , is stationed with his men at an old mill . Carmen is heavily pregnant with 's child . 's father , a tailor , had died during the war . When and arrive at the mill , stern shows little concern for his new stepdaughter but takes great care to ensure that 's pregnancy progresses smoothly . He commissioned a local doctor , ( ) to stay at the mill and tend to . Ofelia wanders off to the nearby woods where she discovers a strange stone structure . She is found by 's housekeeper , ( ) , who explains that the structure is an ancient labyrinth that should not enter , lest she get lost . Mercedes gently ushers back to the house . and settle into their bedroom . speaks with in his study , explaining that should not have traveled in such a late stage of an already difficult pregnancy . It becomes increasingly obvious that only values as a vessel for his child , which he is certain will be a son to carry on his name . 's tyrannical temper is revealed that night when he brutally murders two peasants whom his men mistook for rebel fighters , but who were merely farmers hunting for rabbits . realizes this after the men are dead , but blames his soldiers for the error , barking that they should " learn to search these assholes properly " before consulting him . That night , sleeps beside her mother . In the middle of the night she is woken by the sound of fluttering wings and beholds a large insect she 'd spotted during the the journey to the mill . After shows the insect what she considers a fairy to look like in a book , the insect transforms into a tiny fairy , and gestures to to follow it . It leads her outside to the stone labyrinth . When reaches the underground center of the maze , she is greeted by a faun , ( , voiced by ) , a supernatural creature that is half - man , half - goat . He explains to that she is really the long - lost from the underground realm . The faun explains that he had been sent by the to bring her home , but that she must first prove herself worthy of returning . The faun presents with a magic book that will detail three tasks which she must complete by the next full moon . The first task , he explains , is to retrieve a key from the stomach of a giant toad that lives beneath a fig tree in the forest . He gives her three magic stones which she must feed to the toad . He also tells to look for a moon - shaped birthmark on her shoulder that identifies her as the princess . Meanwhile , and are risking their lives by secretly aiding the group of rebels hiding in the woods , one of whom is ' brother ( ) . Since had decided to starve out the rebels by keeping all available food and medicine locked up in the mill 's storeroom , and must smuggle the goods silently in the dead of night . Both are all too aware of the sadistic violence inflicts upon those who disobey him . is hosting a banquet at the mill for some local political figureheads . Carmen expects to attend , and presents her with a beautiful new dress and shoes for the occasion . Ofelia accepts the gifts with lukewarm gratitude , as she is distracted by the thought of the first task . As prepares to take her bath , she examines the magic book , which informs her that the task must take place that day . Shortly before the dinner party , wearing her new clothes , escapes to the woods . She finds the fig tree and crawls into the cavern below . She manages to feed the magic stones to the enormous toad , which vomits out its insides . finds the key amid the sticky mess , and departs . She returns to the house , her new dress ruined . Carmen sends her to bed without supper . During the banquet , 's rigid views become apparent . He vows not to rest until every rebel is shot dead . The town mayor ( ) recalls being in the army with 's father , who , upon his death , smashed his watch on a rock to ensure that his son would know the exact time of his demise . dismisses this , claiming that his father never owned a watch ( though he is seen several times meticulously cleaning an old broken pocketwatch in his study).Despite her punishment from her mother , is pleased with her success at completing the first task . Checking on the magic book again while taking a bath , blood - red ink begins to spread over the page in the shape of a womb . A thud is heard in the bedroom and finds her mother collapsed on the floor , hemorrhaging from her uterus and begging for help . stabilizes with a powerful sedative and informs that the outlook for his wife is grim : she must remain on strict bed rest . Vidal orders the doctor to save his son , even at the expense of his wife 's life . is sent to a separate bedroom and is comforted by , who has become 's friend and protector as grows weaker and weaker . Vidal and his men continue to hunt for rebels in the forest . While examining a recently abandoned campsite , finds a small glass vial of antibiotics , which he eyes suspiciously before pocketing . During the night , the appears in 's room and asks why she has not begun the second task yet . explains that her mother is not well . The faun gives her a mandrake root , explaining that , when placed under her mother 's bed in a bowl of milk and fed with drops of blood , it will improve her health . Ofelia obeys , feeding the the humanoid mandrake under 's bed with her blood from her finger . 's condition quickly improves , and is now free to begin her next task . That night , is again visited in her room wall by the who gives her instructions for her second task , which involves invading the lair of a feared monster and retrieving a golden dagger . Above all things , is warned explicitly to not eat any of anything from the enormous feast that she will find laid out on a table within the lair . The gives a piece of magic chalk , an hourglass , and the aid of three fairies . She is to use the chalk to draw a magic door leading to the monster 's lair , flip the hourglass , and return with the dagger before the last grain of sand falls . After forging the other - worldly door through her bedroom wall , follows a hallway to a large room where a magnificent feast is set out on a large table . At the head of the table sits a child - eating creature known as the ( ) , completely motionless , with two eyeballs set on a plate front of him . finds that the creature is immobile and does n't respond to her presence . On the walls she sees hideous paintings of the devouring children , and a large pile of children 's shoes in a corner of the room . On the far wall are three cabinet doors , one of which she unlocks with the key she retrieved from the toad , and removes the desired dagger from within . As she begins to leave , she pauses beside the table and eyes a platter of grapes . Enchanted by the food and very hungry , she ignores the previous warnings of the 's and the present warnings of the fairies . Ofelia plucks a grape from the bunch and eats it . The fairies frantically try to alert her as the jolts awake , inserting the eyeballs into sockets in his palms . Not seeing this , eats another grape before she turns to see the approaching her . The fairies try to distract the creature but he grabs two of them and eats them . Horrified , runs with the last fairy . The chases down the hallway . In horror , she notices the chalked doorway closing as the hourglass runs out . However , manages to draw another doorway in the ceiling and barely escapes back into her room . and make another dangerous visit to the rebels in the woods , bringing them supplies from the storeroom . One of the rebels , ( ) , is suffering a from an infection in his leg from a bullet wound . determines the leg must be amputated before gangrene spreads beyond it , and takes on the unpleasant task in the rebel hideout . The revisits in her room and she gives him the dagger , but admits that something went wrong during the second task . The remaining fairy guide angrily whispers in the 's ear , explaining 's disobedience . He admonishes her for her recklessness and tells her that , with the full moon only three days away , she may never prove herself worthy of returning to her kingdom . He vanishes , leaving alone and in misery . The next day , loud crashing sounds are heard though the woods . assembles his men and they rush into the woods to confront what they assume to be attacking rebels , but discover a derailed train , an apparent decoy move , and no rebels in sight . Vidal returns to the mill to find that the storeroom is missing a large amount of supplies . He also sees that the lock is not broken or tampered with . This leads him to suspect , since she carries the only key to the storeroom . He questions her , but she assures him that she had nothing to do with it . Vidal and his men finally have a direct shootout with the rebels one rainy day in the forest . They callously shoot all the seriously wounded men they find , but when they discover a rebel sustaining only a leg wound , they haul him to the storeroom for interrogation . Mercedes soon learns that a rebel has been captured for torture , and rushes to the storeroom in fear that it is her brother . catches a glimpse of the man 's desperate face before the door swings shut and sees that the unfortunate prisoner is not , but an associate nicknamed ( casually shows the array of tools that he will be using to " extract " information about the rebels . Noticing that speaks with a heavy stutter , taunts him with a proposition : if can count to three without stuttering , he will be set free . Vidal addresses his second - in - command , ( ) , who confirms 's power to release him . attempts 's challenge , but fails . begins the torture . is later summoned to the storeroom by , who wants him to strengthen for another round of interrogation . Ferrerio is horrified to see reduced to a broken , bloody pulp who is begging for death . gently euthanizes the poor man , angering , who fatally shoots as he departs the storeroom . had also discovered vials of antibiotics in the doctor 's case that were identical to the ones found at the rebel campsite , confirming 's involvement in aiding the rebels . Later , checks on the mandrake beneath her mother 's bed . She is interrupted violently by , who discovers the mandrake root with disgust . Carmen wakes and Vidal shoves the milk - soaked mandrake into her hands , chastising her for letting read fairy tales and get silly ideas . Carmen insists on speaking to alone , and leaves them . Though and had a close and loving relationship , 's sad and dismal view of the world made a sharp contrast with her daughter 's optimistic innocence . Carmen attempts to prove to that magic does not exist , and throws the mandrake root into the blazing fireplace . Moments later , collapses in pain . The mandrake , which had become the embodiment of 's health , is destroyed in the flames . Carmen is dragged into a harrowing labor which she does not survive . She delivers a healthy son , which is satisfaction enough for , but is devastated by her mother 's death . Now orphaned and at the mercy of her evil stepfather , 's only ally is . admits to that she knows that she and the doctor had been helping the men in the woods , but swears to keep the secret to herself . Vidal summons to his study that night , casually musing about how the storeroom could have been opened so easily when she had supposedly given him the only key some time before . Mercedes , knowing that has discovered her secret , prepares to escape the mill that night . She stops by 's room to say goodbye , but ends up bringing her along as the girl begged not to be left alone at the mill . Mercedes and attempt to escape that rainy night , but are quickly apprehended by and his men . drags back to her bedroom , furious that she had known about and aiding the rebels . He locks her in her room , giving his men orders to kill her if anyone tries to break in . He then returns to the storeroom , where has been brought and bound for torture . begins the same speech he gave to , showing the various tools he will use to extract information from her . While his back is turned , cuts through her binds with a small paring knife kept hidden in her apron and attacks , plunging the blade into his back and then shoving it into his mouth . She furiously warns him not to harm , and then slashes the knife through the side of his cheek before fleeing into the forest . Vidal , not quite incapacitated , orders his men to bring her back at once . arrives at a clearing in the woods before several of 's men catch up to her on horseback . Garces tauntingly approaches her , but a barrage of shots ring out from the surrounding trees , shooting all the men off their horses . The surviving rebels emerge from the woods , led by , who embraces his sister as she weeps with relief . Locked away in her room , is visited again by the . He has decided to grant her one last chance to prove herself as . He tells her that the third and final task is to fetch her infant brother and take him into the center of the labyrinth . escapes her bedroom using the piece of magic chalk and sneaks into 's quarters where the baby boy is kept . takes a bottle of sedative previously administered to her mother by and hides in 's room , watching him sew up the horrid gash in his cheek . While he is distracted , drugs his glass of scotch heavily with the medicine . As he drinks , gunfire and explosions erupt as the rebels begin an attack on the mill . rushes to the doorway but begins to stagger as he begins feeling the effects of the drugs . makes out the bleary image of standing in the doorway holding the baby , who she had gently taken from his cradle . Vidal stumbles after as she runs to the labyrinth with her brother . When reaches the center of the labyrinth with the baby , the is waiting for her with the dagger from the 's lair . The explains that the full moon is nigh and that the portal to the underground realm , 's kingdom , must be opened with the blood of an innocent . He says he needs a drop of blood from the baby - just a pinprick - to open the portal and return to her true home . staunchly refuses to let her baby brother be harmed in any way , and insists she would give up her chance at entering the heavenly kingdom for him . finally catches up to her and sees her talking to nothing but air . He forcibly takes the baby and shoots in the stomach before departing the labyrinth . As begins to bleed out , she collapses onto the stone portal in the bottom of the maze . Her blood begins to drip into the portal , and she faintly smiles as her body becomes still . Vidal exits the labyrinth with the baby , only to be met by a score of armed rebels ( including ) waiting for him . Knowing he can not escape them now , he calmly hands his son to , asking her to tell him one day what time is father died . Before he can finish his last request , firmly assures him that the boy " wo n't even know your name . " Pedro then shoots in the face , leaving him dead at the entrance to the labyrinth . Mercedes and the rebels rush into the labyrinth and find bleeding out into the stonework . Mercedes weeps uncontrollably as draws her last breath . As leaves the mortal world , she is transported to a grand hall and sees both her parents , alive again , sitting atop tall thrones . She has been called home as at last , to be reunited with the and . The appears and explains that the last " task " was a test of honor and integrity . Because offered her own blood to open the portal instead of her brother 's , she proved herself brave and kindhearted enough to re - enter the underground realm . The narrator explains that became the eventual beloved ruler of the realm , and that small traces of her time in the mortal world are still visible , but only to those who know where to look.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The story opens in 1898 in the wilderness . A man named ( - ) works his silver mine . After blasting out the small mine with dynamite , falls and breaks his leg . After finding the silver ore , he drags himself out of the mine and into town to sell it . He hires a crew , including a man caring for an infant son . When the silver lode plays out , discovers oil in the mine . He designs and builds a pump and recreates himself as an oil man . The young father dies in a drilling accident , adopts the young boy as his own and names him Nine years later , is a successful if still somewhat minor oil man . He has several productive wells around and , with ( ) , travels the state to buy the drilling rights to private property . At a meeting with local people of an unidentified town , lectures them on his business plan : he claims he does all the work himself , only hires men he can trust to complete the work and will eliminate the need for a " contractor " , a middleman of sorts that will collect more money from the community that believes should go back to the landowners themselves . He also introduces his son as his partner and claims that his business is a family - run operation . When the people begin to question him rigorously and argue loudly among themselves , turns down the offer and leaves , knowing the community is a bit too smart to be taken advantage of . later meets with a husband and wife and draws up a contract to drill on their land . The couple are reluctant but appeals to them by talking about their children . The well comes in as a gusher some time later . One night , a young man named ( ) visits 's camp . sells to Plainview information about his family 's ranch in , , which he says has an ocean of oil underneath it . Plainview and travel to the and , while pretending to hunt quail , confirm what told them . That night , Plainview negotiates with the patriarch , ( ) and 's twin brother , ( ) . The price is $ 10,000 , which will go to the building of a new parish , the of the ; is a bland but ambitious preacher and faith healer . agrees to pay half of the money at first and will pay the rest when the derrick produces . wants to pray to conclude the deal but Plainview refuses . Plainview assembles his crew at the and builds the first . He also buys almost all of the land surrounding the so he will have not only those drilling rights but also the right to build a pipeline to the ocean to circumvent the railroads and their shipping costs . Only a man named refuses to sell . wants to bless the derrick before drilling begins but rebuffs him and instead has 's little sister , ( ) , dedicate the new endeavor . and become playmates and buys her a new dress . At dinner one night , he tells in front of that her father will never hit her again for refusing to pray . and continue to irritate one another : Plainview resents that solicits his workers to come to daily prayer services they need rest , and complains to him about workers drinking . But when a worker dies while trying to free the drill , has arrange for the funeral . When meeting with about the funeral at his ramshackle church , he watches deliver a fiery sermon about casting out the from a elderly woman with severe arthritis . After mass , agrees to speak at the funeral and tells that , had he been permitted to bless the well , the accident might never have happened . eventually collects enough money to build himself a larger church , naming it the of the . A few days later , the drill finally strikes oil . The escaping gases cause an explosion . , who was watching the drill from the derrick , is deafened . He becomes sullen and mistrusting . Soon has three thriving oil wells in the area . goes to and demands the $ 5000 that promised him and his church . immediately attacks him , slapping him and dragging him to a pool of mud , which he smears all over . also mocks 's supposed power of faith healing , saying that did nothing to restore 's hearing . Shortly thereafter , a man named ( ) appears on 's doorstep , claiming to be 's half brother . Because he knows details about 's family and hometown of , , trusts him and takes him on as a worker . Plainview admits to that he holds most people in contempt and uses them only to further his own goals . " I have a competition in me , " he tells him . " I want no one else to succeed . " He also admits that he ca n't do his work alone anymore . H.W. snoops through 's belongings and , jealous that has someone new in his life , attempts to burn down the house with and in it . Plainview does n't discipline , but instead concludes he ca n't control him anymore and sends him away to a boarding school in , abruptly leaving him on the train with his assistant , , who accompanies him there . Competitors try to buy 's wells for $ 1 million but rejects the offer and their patronizing sympathy for When one competitor suggests Plainview should retire to take care of , threatens his life . He and go to the property to inquire about leasing the land to build the pipeline . After surveying the land , they swim in the ocean . When does n't seem to understand a reference about , grows suspicious . That night , , brandishing a pistol , forces to confess : is n't his brother , but knew his brother in . When the real brother died , assumed his identity and made his way to and found . Plainview kills and buries him in a shallow grave on the property . The next morning , ( ) wakes and tells him that he can lease the land if he allows himself to be baptized at the of the . When reveals that he knows killed , has no choice but to agree . He is baptized after he publicly and loudly announces that he is a sinner and abandoned , is violently slapped several times by on the dais and is warmly embraced by the church . also announces to the church that has given them $ 5000 , the original amount he owed . returns from the boarding school and Plainview warmly greets him . now knows language and speaks through an interpreter . He and play together , and she learns sign language too . When they are married in the late 1920s , she signs the minister 's sermon and marriage rites to him . Plainview has become a drunkard , even more misanthropic and isolated than ever , living alone in a large mansion and shooting his valuables with a pistol . When announces his intention to move to and begin his own oil business , immediately becomes more despondent and reveals that was never his biological son and insultingly disowns him . Sometime later , visits him in the mansion 's bowling alley , finding passed out on the floor . As , like a beast , gnaws the cold steak leftover from his dinner , reveals that old has died and that his grandson wants to sell the oil drilling rights to his grandfather 's land in order to fund his goal of becoming a movie star -- with as the broker for the deal . Plainview agrees but only if will say that he is a " false prophet and is a superstition . " When does so several times , reveals that , having owned all the wells around the ranch , he has already taken the oil from the property through drainage . reveals that , despite a successful radio preaching career , he is broke due to bad investments . Plainview chases him around the bowling alley then bludgeons him to death with a bowling pin . When the butler comes to see what the commotion has been , Plainview announces , " I 'm finished " .</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) is a widower with two young children . He was once a very vicious gunfighter , but after marrying , gave up gunfighting , drinking , and most other vices . His wife died of smallpox in 1878 , but he continues to try to eke out a living with his children on their hog farm , and to try to be the kind of man he believes his late wife would want him to be . It is now 1880.The town of , is ruled rather arbitrarily by a sheriff named ( ) . Two cowboys , ( ) and ( ) are spending their leave at a brothel owned by ( ) . One of the women , , makes an offhanded comment that perceives as an insult , so he attacks her with a knife , scarring her face . and the de facto madam , ( ) hold them until Little can arrive . The women want and to hang , but decides that since they did not murder , they should be horse - whipped instead . However , is more concerned with potential loss of business due to 's disfigurement . So Little decrees that instead of being horsewhipped , the men will have to give some horses . This outrages the women even more , and afterward they meet privately and pool all their resources to offer a reward to anyone who will kill the two attackers . We meet on his farm trying to deal with some sick hogs . It quickly becomes clear that he is not a very good hog farmer , as he repeatedly falls in the mud when trying to grab a hog . In the midst of this he has a visitor , a young man calling himself the ( ) , who knows by reputation and would like his help in killing and in return for half the reward money . makes it clear that he is not interested because , since marrying his late wife , he does n't do the things he used to do anymore . But after the leaves , goes back to his bumbling attempts at tending hogs , and begins to have second thoughts . He sets a can on a tree stump and begins firing at it with his pistol , without hitting it . Finally he goes in the house and gets his shotgun , and blows the can away on the first shot . Back in Big , and show up with the horses for . The women throw stones and horse manure at them . has never shown any remorse at any point , but seems genuinely sorry about what happened to . He pointedly tells that one of the horses is not for him , and then offers it to . The women only throw more manure . Realizing that he will need help in the tracking down the wayward cowboys , decides to contact his former partner , ( ) . He says goodbye to his kids , telling them if they need anything to see 's common law wife , . After several bumbling and unsuccessful attempts to mount his horse , he finally mounts successfully and rides to 's . , apparently recognizing that whatever has in mind can not end well , just glares at him without speaking the entire time he is there . If looks could kill , not only and but the entire movie audience would be dead by the end of the scene . But as it is , the two men ride off in pursuit of the . Eventually they catch him , and soon discern that he is severely nearsighted and ca n't see a target more than 50 yards away . The first to arrive in Big in pursuit of the reward is a gray - haired Englishman known as ( ) . We first meet him traveling on a train with his biographer , named ( ) . has just been shot ( which , of course , occurred in 1881 , meaning that some months have passed since the original attack on ) , and is lecturing his fellow - passengers on the benefits of monarchy over democracy ( despite the also being assassinated earlier that same year ) . He and arrive in Big , where catches him concealing a gun . He brutally beats and kicks until he is nearly unconscious , then throws both him and in jail . At the jail , debunks many of the stories has told about his exploits . Soon is out of his cell and working as 's biographer rather than 's . Little finally puts on a train out of town . and his companions see the train carrying go by as they approach town . A torrential downpour begins , and by the time the party reaches town , is sick with fever . Arriving at the saloon , and the go upstairs to engage the services of the prostitutes , but does n't do that sort of thing anymore and remains downstairs . Little sizes up as an out - of - towner after the reward money , and beats and kicks him in a similar way to what he did to , has him thrown out into the street , and sends his deputies upstairs after and the . and the escape through a window , manage to get onto his horse , and ride out of town , where nurses Munny back to health with the help of some of the prostitutes . By the time has regained his health , the rain has stopped but there is snow on the ground . In the next scene the snow is gone , meaning some time has been elapsing as 's partners have scouted out their targets . In that next scene , we see with a group of cowboys chasing a calf . A shot rings out , hitting 's horse , which falls over , breaking the man 's leg and pinning him to the ground . fired the shot , but now he ca n't bring himself to finish the man off , and the ca n't see that far , so fires several shots and finally hits him . As lies dying , he complains of being thirsty . calls out to the other cowboys to give the man a drink , and promises not to shoot . They do , and is true to his word . has had enough of killing and leaves his companions to return home , but is captured by 's men , and we see him being interrogated by . Men are also assigned to protect . and the wait outside the house where and his guards are holed up . When comes out to use the outhouse , the waits until he is finished and then shoots him . But the ca n't deal with the fact that he has killed a man ( he has boasted repeatedly of having killed five men , but now admits that this was his first ) , and resolves to never kill again , telling , " I 'm not like you . " has him drink some whiskey , but it does n't help . One of the prostitutes brings the reward money and informs them that has been killed , after revealing 's identity . sends the home with the reward money , telling him to leave his and 's shares with his children and take the rest and use it to buy some good spectacles . He then rides toward town , drinking whiskey from a bottle as he goes . Outside the saloon , he sees 's body upright in an open casket , with a sign saying that this is what happens to assassins in this town . enters the , where most of the townsmen have gathered . He asks who owns the establishment , and when identifies himself , tells the men near him to move away , and then shoots him . Little calls him a coward for shooting an unarmed man , but replies , " He should have armed himself , if he 's going to decorate his saloon with my friend . " He then tells those near to move away . His shotgun misfires , but he throws it at , draws his pistol and shoots him , and shoots several other men attempting to draw guns on him ; some of them get shots off before kills them , but none hit him . He then tells everyone who does n't want to be killed to leave , and all who are able to leave do so . He goes to the bar and helps himself to more whiskey . was not able to leave because of a body lying on top of him . has him give him a rifle lying nearby , which he loads . Beauchamp tries to engage him in conversation about gunfighting , but 's response frightens him into leaving as well . Little turns out to still be alive , but hears him cock his pistol , and steps on his hand before he can get a shot off . As aims his rife at , the latter complains that he does n't deserve this . Munny replies , " ' Deserves ' has nothing to do with it . " Little then says , " I 'll see you in , . " simply replies , " Yeah , " and shoots him . As he walks to the saloon door , one of the men he shot previously in pain , and he shoots him again . At the door , he announces that he is coming out , that he will kill anyone he sees , and if anyone shoots at him , he will kill not only the shooter but his wife and all his friends and burn his house down . He walks to his horse , and no one shoots . He mounts his horse and as he rides past 's body , he announces that if they do n't bury right , or if they harm the prostitutes in any way , he 'll come back and kill every man in the town . As the closing credits roll , we learn that subsequently moved with his children to , where he " prospered in dry goods . "</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) , a prominent child psychologist , returns home one night with his wife , ( ) , from an event in which he was honored for his work . His wife tells him that everything in the world is second to his job including her . The two discover they are not alone ; a young man ( ) appears brandishing a gun . He says that he does n't want to be afraid anymore and accuses of failing him . recognizes him as , a former patient whom he treated as a child for hallucinations . shoots in the lower abdomen , and seconds later turns the gun on himself . The next fall , begins working with another boy , nine year - old ( ) , who has a condition similar to 's . becomes dedicated to this patient , though he is haunted by doubts over his ability to help him after his failure with . Meanwhile , his relationship with his wife begins to fall apart due to his focus on work . Once earns his trust , eventually confides in him that he " sees dead people that walk around like regular people . " Though at first thinks is delusional , he eventually comes to believe that is telling the truth and that may have had the same ability . He suggests to that he try to find a purpose for his gift by communicating with the ghosts , perhaps to aid them in their unfinished business on . at first does not want to , because the ghosts terrify him , but he soon decides to try it . One is an overworked wife abused by her husband who slit her wrists ; another that tries to hurt is only heard as a voice who starts calmly pleading to to let him out of the dark cupboard because he 's suffocating , then yells at that he did n't steal " the 's horse " and threatens to attack if he does n't obey . The third ghost appears very briefly ; a boy a bit older than asks him to come into the room , to find the boy 's father 's gun . The boy turns around to show that he has a large gunshot exit wound on the back of his head . finally talks to one of the ghosts , a very sick girl who appears in his bedroom . He finds out where the girl , ( ) , lived and goes to her house during her funeral reception . died after a prolonged illness and funeral guests note that 's younger sister is starting to get sick , too . 's ghost appears and gives a box , which is opened to reveal a videotape . When gives it to 's father , the videotape shows 's mother putting floor cleaner fluid in 's food while she cared for during her illness . The continual illness may point to a slow poisoning in a case of syndrome by confesses his secret to his mother , ( ) . Although his mother at first does not believe him , soon tells that her own mother once went to see her perform in a dance recital one night when she was a child , and that was not aware of this because her mother stayed in the back of the audience where she could not be seen . He also tells her the answer to a question she asked when alone at her mother 's grave . tearfully accepts this as the truth . also counsels on his marriage , suggesting he try talking to his wife while she is asleep . returns to his home , where he finds his wife asleep on the couch with the couple 's wedding video on in the background , not for the first time . As she sleeps , 's hand releases 's wedding ring ( which he suddenly discovers he has not been wearing ) , revealing the twist ending of the film : himself was actually killed by and was unknowingly dead the entire time he was working with . Due to 's efforts , 's unfinished business rectifying his failure to understand is finally complete . Recalling 's advice , speaks to his sleeping wife and fulfills the second reason he returned , saying she was " never second , " and that he loves her . Releasing her to move on with her own life , he is free to leave behind the world of the living.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) and ( ) are on a ferryboat in foggy headed towards , an island containing a federal mental hospital for the criminally insane . They are going to the island because a woman patient named escaped the day before . is very ill , sweating and throwing up in the toilet , telling himself to get it together , it 's just water . Then he looks out the window and says it 's a of water . He goes up on deck to talk to , and it 's apparent that they are new partners working for the first time together . During their conversation it is revealed that 's wife died in an apartment fire several years before . is sorry he brought it up . He refers to as boss all the way through the movie , and at one point mentions that is a legend , so we know that is well known through the and that he is 's superior . They get to the island , and the ferry captain mentions that there is a big storm coming . and meet the deputy warden , , who takes them into the mental hospital grounds . There are high walls that make it look like a prison , and electrified wire on the perimeter , but the actual buildings and grounds look almost like a college campus . There is the A building , housing the male patients , B building for the women patients , and C building which is situated on the highest point of the island and we are told it was a civil war fortress . It houses the most dangerous patients and the marshals are told that under no circumstances are they to go there on their own without and ( ) accompanying them . There is a brief argument when deputy warden requires them to give up their firearms . says that they are federal agents , but tells them that federal penitentiary law overrides that and says that they wo n't get through the gates with their weapons . They reluctantly give them up , with rather clumsily removing his holster from his pants , which gets him a look from and . They meet , who explains a bit about the facility and psychiatry . says that there is a war going on in psychiatry , with one faction who believes in surgical techniques like lobotomies to treat patients , where another side says that the new psychotropic drugs are the way to treat people . He believes that sometimes just listening to a patient and quietly making their life comfortable is the way to go . still has a splitting headache from the ferry trip , and the doctor gives him some water and some pills that he says are aspirin . He explains that , a patient , has escaped the night before but says that it 's impossible because she seems to have simply vanished through the walls . She is at because she drowned three of her children one by one , and then pretended that they had never died . In fact , she believes that she is still at her home at the hospital , and all of the staff and other inmates are merely neighbours or deliverymen that she encounters in her daily life . She refuses to accept that she has killed anyone , or even that her children are dead . They tour the rest of the island , where officers are looking for the escaped . There is a lighthouse on the other side of the island that is gated off and there are armed guards , which makes a little suspicious . makes it clear that his job is to interview staff and patients . He says he needs the personnel records of the staff , but the doctor kind of blows that off . They go to the patient living quarters and interview staff about the night that left . In her cell , there is a loose floorboard and a handwritten note from her , saying " The law of 4 . Who is 67 ? " . The staff are less than helpful at the meeting that and have to ask about her , but do note that she had attended group therapy right before she went to her room and disappeared . During the meeting , it is revealed that she has a staff physician who conducted the meeting , a . When asks where he is , says he just left that morning on the ferry to go on a long planned vacation . is incredulous that a dangerous mental patient has just escaped , there 's a lockdown , and her doctor is allowed to just go on vacation . Things definitely look suspicious at this point . There are a series of dream sequences interspersed , flashbacks about 's time in as a soldier , and often has internal conversations with himself in which his dead wife , ( ) , talks to him and gives him advice . In one flashback , 's unit is the first to liberate the concentration camp . There are many dead . is especially moved by a dead woman and her dead daughter in her arms in the middle of a pile of dead bodies . remembers watching the attempt suicide by shooting himself , but he only wounds himself , shooting himself in the side of his face . The German tries to reach his gun to finish the job , but slowly slides the gun away with his foot just out of reach of the , watching him suffer before he bleeds to death . In other dreams , his wife discovering that he has a lot of empty bottles of alcohol that he has hidden around the house . He explains that the things he saw while in are the reason why he drinks so much . After the meeting with staff , has and over to his mansion on the island to have a cigar and something to drink . When they arrive , there is a ( ) in the den , and he seems to be 's superior . takes an instant dislike to him when he notices a faint German accent , and the two verbally spar for a little bit . is amused , commenting on 's remarkable defence mechanisms . calls and men of violence , which offends . But the doctor says he does n't mean that they are violent men , only that they are men who have seen violence and do n't shy away from it if necessary . He correctly surmises that they were both in the army during , and that they were n't raised to run away from violence . gets angry when they say that they 've consulted the board of directors who have refused to release the staff 's personnel records , angry enough that breaks a glass , threatens to end the investigation in the morning and turn his findings over to the , and storms off in a huff . The next day , the storm has hit the island and it is clear the ferry will not arrive . was only bluffing the night before as he has no intention of leaving without investigating the island some more . and have several interviews with the patients who were in the group therapy session with . They are unhelpful and all seem to be following a script because they say very similar things in their interviews . In one interview , a woman asks for a glass of water and when he leaves , she grabs 's notebook and writes something very quickly and gives it back to him . He and leave the hospital grounds and explore the island , ending up at the cemetery . The wind and rain are picking up and they find sanctuary in a cemetery vault . asks to level with him ; he suspects that the last patient told him something while he was getting her water , and finally shows him the notebook , and it says . finally explains that he was trying to get assigned to an investigation of the mental hospital for some time . He says that a man named was a maintenance worker at the apartment they lived in and he was the arsonist who set the fire that killed his wife . He got off on a technicality , but later was caught when he killed some other people . He was sent to the mental hospital here . But when looked into it , there was no paperwork at all for , and he suspects that there is some greater conspiracy going on . He mentions the experiments and wonders if his own government is involved in psychotropic drug research as well . He tells that he came across a prisoner by the name of who was actually sent here some time before and he was the one who clued in that there was some crazy research going on here . suddenly gets paranoid that maybe in all of 's poking around he alerted the wrong people to his interest in and that maybe they arranged the disappearance of as an excuse to draw him here as a to investigate where they could make both of them disappear . is not sure that 's possible , but is pretty convincing and suddenly , the door busts in and there is a car spotlight on them from dep . 's car . He s been looking for them and they get in and he takes them back to the hospital . They change out of their wet business suits , and the orderly gives them the staff white uniforms that almost make them look like patients , and he tells them that it will take a day or two to get their suits back . They do n't like the whites but take them anyway . The orderly says their cigarettes were ruined ( they both smoke a lot ) , but he gives them two new packs of cigs . They meet in 's office again . They argue briefly about the investigation , and suddenly gets ill again , a migraine . He thinks he 'll be okay , but then he starts to fall and catches him . The doctor gives him a couple of pills , but does n't want to take them . He s really sick , though , and the doctor almost insists that he take them , and he does . helps him down to the basement with all the rest of the staff to wait out the hurricane like storm . Just before he dozes off , he sees a sinister looking guy , who an orderly says is the warden ( , the killer from of the ) . The warden kind of sneers at right before falls asleep . has another dream sequence with his wife , who tells him that is on the island , and that he needs to help her . In a dream , is in 's den , and ( ) in his chair by the fire . has a really nasty scar running from his right eye down to the left side of his chin , and his left eye is milky white . The next day is kind of chaotic . The backup generators fail , and all of the patients ' cell doors were therefore opened . Trees are fallen all over the hospital campus with staff and officers trying to clean up as well as gather up all of the wandering patients . and use this as an opportunity to go up to C building while no one is really paying attention to them . The place is really dark inside and they wander around . A patient runs from them and they give chase . falls behind and the patient grabs from behind and is choking him . gets away and beats the crap out of him until pulls him off . A guard chews out and has help him take the patient to the medical centre , telling to take a walk and cool off . wanders around and finds a row of cells where a prisoner is sitting by himself and saying the name . When demands the prisoner look at him , he realizes it is , the guy who was a former patient here who told him about what was going on at . 's face is badly beaten . ca n't believe he is back here and is yelling at him that its all about , is n't it ? He tells that the only way he can save is to forget his wife and and focus on what is going on here . looks guilty when tells him it is his fault that is back here because he kept inquiring about . promises that he 'll get out of there . tells him that is no longer in C building , but that they have taken him to the lighthouse , where they are planning to do a lobotomy on him . He says that the lighthouse is where they do a lot of their experiments on people who are troublemakers . questions him about , implying that he is a plant by the government to follow . He asks him whether he s ever worked with before , and we know that they have n't because they let us know that in the beginning . finally catches up with and they head towards the office . says they found ( ) . They go to her cell and there is a weird scene where tries to talk to her and she ultimately thinks he is her dead husband and starts yelling at him . At some point , 's dream sequences now include as the woman with her daughter in the pile of bodies at . And this time they open their eyes and look at him . The girl asks him why he did n't save her . He says he tried but they ( the soldiers ) just did nt get there in time . In another scene , is all bloody but she is at and his wife 's vacation cottage . They go outside and sees the little girl and picks her up and carries her to the water . The little girl asks him again why he did n't save her and he looks sad . and leave and says he found 's file but there was only his commitment paper in the file which he tries to show but he wo nt look at it now because he is intent on reaching the lighthouse . is acting suspicious of when he tries to talk him out of going to the lighthouse . They arrive at the cliffs over the ocean and realize they are too far south of the lighthouse . says he is going to go around and try to get there a different way . Again tries to talk him out of it because it 's dangerous to scale the cliffs when it will be dark soon . They argue some more and tells him he is going by himself . gets near the lighthouse but finds that it is late enough in the day that the tide has cut off the lighthouse from the island . He gives up and goes back to where is to tell him they 'll try later . But all he sees is a burning cigarette on the edge of the cliff ( it 's about a hundred feet down to the rocks below ) . He looks over and sees at the bottom of the cliff with waves crashing over him . Shocked , climbs down the cliff but does n't see at the bottom . He sees a cave in the side of the cliff with a fire burning inside . When he reaches the cave , he sees a woman armed with a knife . They begin talking and she says she is ( ) , but that she was a doctor at the hospital who found out too much and they committed her and concocted a story that she killed her kids . The other must be an imposter they used to fool and . She says there is a secret government program to test a number of new drugs on the patients to make them sort of super spies or soldiers who do n't feel pain and do n't have memories that can be tortured out of them if they are captured . She then warns that they will not let him leave . They will concoct a story that he went crazy . She asks him if he had a serious trauma ( his wife dying ) , and says that they will use that to say that he cracked . She asks him if he has taken any medication ( he has ; the aspirin for his headaches ) . She asks if he 's eaten at the hospital , or smoked any of their cigarettes ( the orderly gave him a new pack when his clothes were all wet ) . She says that it takes 36 - 48 hours for psychotropic drugs to take effect and make him pliable for them to control . The first sign will be tremors in his hands , which he already has . She also questions whether is even a , that he is probably a government agent sent to go with him to the island . When gets back to the road , he sees a jeep pull up with the warden . The warden takes him back to the facility and they have a really weird conversation about being men of violence . The warden tells him that men like them know how to use violence and use it well . He asks if he were to reach over and try to bite his eye out , would be able to stop him . says " why do n't you try and well find out ? " . The warden smiles and says that 's the he was expecting . leaves to confront . wonders where has been . says he 'll be leaving and he asks if the doctor has seen , his partner . says he came to the island alone , there was no partner . realizes that they are already starting to put their plan in action by insisting there was no . He leaves and walks around the grounds , trying to decide what to do next . He sees his wife , who tells him to leave the island and do n't go to the lighthouse . She says the lighthouse will destroy him . He decides to blow up 's car to create a diversion so he can sneak down to the lighthouse . He uses his tie from his suit , soaks it with gas from the gas tank , and lights it . As he moves away from the car , he sees his wife and the little girl in front of the car . It explodes around them but they are n't burned at all . He runs out of there to make it to the lighthouse . He swims over to it , and sneaks up behind a guard and overpowers him and takes his rifle . The guard asks him if he is going to kill him and he says no , but hits him with the rifle and knocks him out . He runs up the stairs of the lighthouse to the top , checking each room but finding no operating rooms for surgical experiments . He gets to the top and finds , sitting behind a desk . holds the rifle on him while he is talking . The doctor tells him there are no bullets in the rifle , and asks him if he killed the guard below . says no , but the doctor calls down anyway to tell the people below to attend to the guard before they come up . sees his gun from the beginning of the movie on the doctors desk . tells that he is a patient at the hospital , and has been for two years . does n't believe him , and says that he is a . The doctor says he was one , but after his breakdown two years ago he was sent here . He broke down when his kids were killed . says he does n't have any kids . says they have been trying to use the new drug therapy to help him and have been trying to do everything they could to treat him . tells him that he has been one of the most dangerous patients they have had and that there are some who want to lobotomize him to make him manageable . The whole last couple of days were an attempt to do a massive role - play to get him to finally realize the truth . He calls in , the doctor from the beginning that went on vacation right after his patient disappeared . The door opens and it is .Chuck ! He is a psychiatrist who agreed to play along with 's fantasy and to keep tabs on him . tells that his real name is , and he shows him on a chalkboard that his full name and 's are an anagram ; that is , all the letters in his name can be rearranged to spell 's full name . The same thing with his wife 's name and 's . constructed the new name to create distance from his real name . The doctor points out that was a fellow patient who attacked a few days before , and that was why he was all beaten up looking . denies this , but the doctor shows him the transcript of what said to him in the cell earlier , where he said this was all 's fault . He tells that the reason why he beat up was that called him by his real name . grabs his gun off the table and shoots , whose blood splashes against the wall . The next second , there is no blood . tells him that his gun was a toy gun they gave him when they began the role - play . He tells that he has completely erased everything he did wrong in an attempt to make himself be the hero . We finally see a flashback where / comes home to his cottage from a week or two of chasing bad guys in . His wife ( ) is acting strangely . He asks where the kids are and she says they are in school . He says it 's , and she smiles and says , they 're in HER school and looks towards the lake . Horrified , runs down to the lake and sees his three children face down in the lake . He scoops them all up , crying uncontrollably and places them on the ground . Then his wife hugs him and says they should put the kids at the dining room table and have dinner . is crying and says if she ever loved him , please stop talking . She is sad now and says she loves him and then there is a shot . looks down and realizes that he just shot his wife . She is laying there with a lot of blood on her and then she dies . now realizes that he has a choice between accepting his truth or continuing to deny it . The doctor makes it clear that if he ca n't accept the truth , then wo n't be able to stop the other doctors from ordering that he be lobotomized . He makes admit that he blamed himself for not realizing earlier that his wife was having trouble . That he feels responsible for killing his kids because he did n't get her help when she needed it . He created a fantasy world where he never killed his wife , and he never had a breakdown . The next day , he and ( ) , are sitting on some steps by the hospital grounds . He asks what their next move is ( as if he still believes he is investigating the hospital as a ) , and says , what do you think , boss ? nods to the other doctors across the grounds who then direct some orderlies to move towards . asks whether it 's better to live as a monster or die a good man . He stands up and willingly goes with the orderlies , as he would rather choose to continue his fantasy than accept the horrors of his reality . Alternatively , he has accepted his reality , but still can not live with the horrors of it . So now at the end of the film he is actually acting out the fantasy , rather than living it . Effectively , he is cured . However , he still ca n't live with his memories so he knowingly forces the doctors to take the decision for physical intervention , ie the lobotomy , knowing he will no longer have to live with his memories as a compliant ' zombie' .. Thus ending his life as a good man.(As contrary in the , where the author ended the book with him still as Teddy)</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) arrives at as a new graduate student . He is a recipient of the prestigious for mathematics . Though he was promised a single room , his roommate ( ) , a literature student , greets him as he moves in and soon becomes his best friend . also meets a group of other promising math and science graduate students , ( ) , ( ) , ( - ) , and ( ) , with whom he strikes up an awkward friendship . Nash admits to that he is better with numbers than people , which comes as no surprise to them after watching his largely unsuccessful attempts at conversation with the women at the local bar . is seeking a truly original idea for his thesis paper , and he is under increasing pressure to develop his thesis so he can begin work . A particularly harsh rejection from a woman at the bar is what ultimately inspires his fruitful work in the concept of governing dynamics , a theory in mathematical economics . After the conclusion of 's studies as a student at , he accepts a prestigious appointment at the of ( ) , along with his friends and . Five years later while teaching a class on at , he places a particularly interesting problem on the chalkboard that he dares his students to solve . When his student ( ) comes to his office to discuss the problem , the two fall in love and eventually marry . On a return visit to , runs into his former roommate and meets ' young ( ) , whom he adores . He also encounters a mysterious of agent , ( ) . is invited to a secret of facility in the to crack a complex encryption of an enemy telecommunication . is able to decipher the code mentally to the astonishment of other codebreakers . observes 's performance from above , while partially concealed behind a screen . gives a new assignment , to look for patterns in magazines and newspapers , ostensibly to thwart a Soviet plot . He must write a report of his findings and place them in a specified mailbox . After being chased by the and an exchange of gunfire , becomes increasingly paranoid and begins to behave erratically . After observing this erratic behavior , informs a psychiatric hospital . Later , while delivering a guest lecture at , realizes that he is being watched by a hostile group of people . Although he attempts to flee , he is forcibly sedated and sent to a psychiatric facility . 's internment seemingly confirms his belief that the were trying to extract information from him . He views the officials of the psychiatric facility as Soviet kidnappers . , desperate to help her husband , visits the mailbox and retrieves all of the never - opened , " top secret " documents that had delivered there . When confronted with this evidence , is finally convinced that he has been hallucinating . The of agent and 's secret assignment to decode Soviet messages was in fact all a delusion . Even more surprisingly , 's friend and his niece are also only products of 's mind . After a painful series of insulin shock therapy sessions , is released on the condition that he agrees to take antipsychotic medication . However , the drugs create negative side - effects that affect his relationship with his wife and , most dramatically , his intellectual capacity . , secretly stops taking his medication and hoards his pills , triggering a relapse of his psychosis . While bathing his infant son , becomes distracted and wanders off . is hanging laundry in the backyard and observes that the gate is open . She discovers that has turned an abandoned shed in a nearby grove of trees into an office for his work for . Upon realizing what has happened , runs into the house to confront and barely saves their child from drowning in the bathtub . When she confronts him , claims that his friend was watching their son . runs to the phone to call the psychiatric hospital for emergency assistance . urges to kill his wife , but angrily refuses to do such a thing . After arguing with , accidentally knocks to the ground . Afterwards , flees the house in fear with their child , but Nash steps in front of her car to prevent her from leaving . After a moment , realizes that is a figment of his hallucinations because she has remained the same age since the day he met her . He tells , " She never gets old . " Only then does he accept that all three people are , in fact , part of his hallucinations . ( It is important to note that in real life , suffered from auditory hallucinations and possible delusions , instead of visual between the intellectual paralysis of the antipsychotic drugs and his delusions , and decide to try to live with his abnormal condition . consciously says goodbye to the three of them forever in his attempts to ignore his hallucinations and not feed his demons . However , he thanks for being his best friend over the years , and says a tearful goodbye to , stroking her hair and calling her " baby girl , " telling them both he would n't speak to them anymore . grows older and approaches his old friend and intellectual rival , now head of the , who grants him permission to work out of the library and audit classes , though the university will not provide him with his own office . Though still suffers from hallucinations and mentions taking newer medications , he is ultimately able to live with and largely ignore his psychotic episodes . He takes his situation in stride and humorously checks to ensure that any new acquaintances are in fact real people , not hallucinations . eventually earns the privilege of teaching again . He is honored by his fellow professors for his achievement in mathematics , and goes on to win the in for his revolutionary work on game theory . and are about to leave the auditorium in , when sees , and standing and smiling . asks , " What 's wrong ? " replies , " Nothing . " With that , they both leave the auditorium.(Source : . Bangs_McCoy)</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The story begins on , a small island 120 miles off the coast of . A large group of construction workers and animal handlers offload a large container , the creature within unseen . During the process , the animal attempts to escape , an act which leads to a mass panic , and the death of one of the workers . The story jumps forward to an mine in the , where we learn that miners extracting amber are involved with a genetic - engineering company called . We also learn that the death of the worker seen earlier has raised serious concerns about the safety of the island , according to , an representative , and that the owner of the island is now seeking top scientific experts in the field to help endorse the park . While he speaks to the man in charge of the mine , , his crew finds a large chunk of amber with a preserved mosquito inside . At a paleontological excavation in we are introduced to , and his assistant , as they slowly uncover the fossilized remains of a , perhaps nature 's most lethal and cunning predator to date , a beautiful specimen evolved to kill . Part of 's research experiments with a new radiological device that shoots a probe into the dirt which bounces an image of an uncovered raptor back to a computer screen . is hesitant about the new technology but seems fascinated with the image it produces without having to dig . He is also a follower of a long - held theory among paleontologists that dinosaurs evolved more from birds than reptiles . One of his assistants has brought along his son , who scoffs at the image on the screen , unimpressed with the fact that it looks like a dead turkey . tells the kid a story about how velociraptors would hunt their prey with fast coordinated attacks . The boy is horrified when explains that after their prey is brought down , velociraptors would often eat their prey alive . The dig is cut short by the sudden appearance of and 's main sponsor , the elderly and eccentric billionaire , . He invites them over to endorse his latest project , a remote island resort , where he claims that their " unique biological attractions " are " guaranteed to drive children out their minds ! " and are reluctant to leave their dig but entices them by offering to fund their work for three more years . and are accompanied by two other characters -- the equally eccentric chaos theorist , and the lawyer , , who represents 's investors . As they arrive by helicopter , they are treated to a unique spectacle of living , breathing dinosaurs . Just the sight of these mighty beasts , a towering accompanied by a herd of , is enough to leave the stunned visitors breathless , save for 's offhand comment : " we 're gon na make a fortune off this place ... " . Later , as they arrive at the island 's central resort and control facility , the visitors are given a brief tour of the process that created the animals . has succeeded in cloning animals from simple strands of DNA salvaged from mosquitoes that fed on dinosaur blood , and were preserved for millions of years inside fossilized amber . The group is shown the egg - incubation room , just in time to witness the birth of a baby , a sight that deeply disturbs . He asks to see where the adults are housed . The special containment facility seen in the introduction , a fortress of electrified fences and dense foliage , all that separates the humans from the most dangerous creature on the island . is witness to the daily feeding of the animals : a cow is lowered into the pit , only to be stripped clean within moments . The visitors ( and the audience ) is spared the gruesome sight of the carnage by a thick covering of jungle foliage ... The group prepares to experience the theme park 's central attraction , in which visitors embark on a safari - like tour of the park , on special electrified . , , and are accompanied by 's two grand children : Lex and her little brother . As the group heads off , settles into the main control room where his two computer experts , and , manage the complex infrastructure of the park . The tour is largely un - eventful : the and -two extremely dangerous carnivores- refuse to reveal themselves to the eager tourists . A sick triceratops is also encountered , tended to by the park veterinarians , whom Sattler leaves the group to help out with . An approaching tropical storm forces the tour to be cut short , as most of the staff leave by ship for the mainland . In the meantime , we learn the true colors of - he has been hired to steal dinosaur embryos for 's rival corporation , BioSyn . In order to steal the embryos , he shuts down security systems throughout the park , but this also causes the tour 's electric cars to break down , and the electrified fences shut down , thus releasing the dinosaurs from containment . In the film 's most thrilling sequence , a - escapes its enclosure and proceeds to wreck the tour vehicles . is eaten , is critically injured , but manages to escape with the terrified children . In the meantime , a lost and confused , trying to hand over the stolen embryos to his contact , encounters a venom - spitting , and justice is dealt . Sattler and the arrive in a jeep at the site of the - attack to find the injured and the remains of , but everyone else has disappeared . The - returns to give chase to the jeep down the road in an exciting car chase of an action sequence , but the humans eventually manage to escape . and the kids spend the night sheltering up a tree , and wake up to find a grazing nearby . Lex is initially frightened , but reassures her ( and the audience ) that Brachiosaurs are peaceful herbivores , and that dinosaurs are n't monsters , they 're just animals . Once more , we are given the opportunity to appreciate the beauty and majesty of these magnificent creatures . With injured and park systems still offline , is forced to take drastic action and reset the system - an act that has the unintended consequences of freeing the vicious velociraptors from their enclosure . , and attempt to restore power , only to have and outsmarted and killed by the cunning creatures . Only Sattler manages to narrowly avoid getting killed . After witnessing a stampede of ostrich - like dinosaurs known as , and the kids make it back to the main resort complex , only to find it abandoned . leaves the kids in the main dining area , and tries to search for other survivors . In the meantime , and are cornered by a pair of raptors inside the main kitchen . In one of the most terrifying scenes in the entire film , the raptors stalk through the dark kitchen , searching for the kids . Eventually , and manage to lure one of the raptors into the freezer and lock it in , but the other raptor chases them out of the kitchen . Meeting up in the control room , , , and the kids attempt to restore power and communications to the park , but are trapped in by the same raptor . In the nick of time , the security systems and phone lines are brought back online . Nevertheless , the raptors manage to break into the control room and gives chase to our heroes throughout the entire building . Eventually , our heroes are cornered by the last two raptors inside the main atrium . Just as all hope is lost , the - come crashing in and attacks the raptors , buying enough time for the small group of humans to escape . As the humans evacuate the island by helicopter , the - gives a final victory roar behind a falling banner proclaiming : " When Dinosaurs Ruled the Earth " . The ending scene is quite powerful and epic , and perfectly captures the spirit of the film in portraying dinosaurs as some of the most magnificent creatures to ever walk the Earth ... </synopsis > 

 < synopsis > In the late 19th century , a " ronin " ( ) ( a samurai without a master ) wanders down a dusty path . Happening onto a house , he asks the man to drink from the man 's well . The man is busy berating his teenage son , who is going off to join a nearby gang of gamblers and does n't want " a long life of eating gruel " . After the son leaves , the man insults the ronin by saying that all sorts are attracted when " they smell . Walking into the nearby town , the ronin sees the streets are empty . A few angry glances from young gang members ( mangier even than the ronin ) are shot at him from sliding doors . The ronin is caught - off guard when he sees a dog trot by with a human hand in it 's mouth . A young - looking gang confronts the ronin , but he wanders off unfazed . He wanders into an empty tavern and orders to the elderly owner , ( ) . only has hot saki and cold rice , but the ronin engulfs it . explains the hierarchy of the town to the ronin . ( ) is the older crime boss of the town , and runs a brothel with his domineering wife , ( ) . appointed silk merchant ( ) the town 's major , but is a puppet for . The competing and more powerful crime boss is ( ) , who rules with violence along with his pig - like brother , ( ) . has appointed the corrupt sake - brewer ( ) as the mayor ( also ) and is more widely - recognized than the powerless , who now wanders around beating a drum in anger . Thinking that his explanation of the town would motivate the ronin to leave , is shocked when the ronin says that he 's going to " stay for a while" . The ronin goes over to 's home and summons his gang out . He tells them he 's going to show them his skills . The ronin then goes over to 's home and is confronted by the same hoodlums who surrounded him earlier . As they posture in front of him , the ronin promises to kill them . The hoodlums attack and the ronin kills several of the men in a matter of seconds . The ronin tells the nearby cooper ( ) how many coffins he needs to make . The ronin returns to 's home and gratefully accepts him . Since he is planning to attack , wants to employ the ronin as a bodyguard . The ronin negotiates the salary to a much higher amount and agrees to the position . asks the ronin his age and his name and , after the ronin puzzles for a moment out the window at a mulberry field , the ronin says his name is " " ( Thirty - something mulberry field ) although he says he 's " actually nearly forty " . comes and calls to the other room . eavesdrops on them and hears that they 're planning to kill him after they use him to lead the attack against . At noon , 's men and gather outside across the street from 's gang . When they start marching forward , walks off . He let 's know that he overheard their scheme to kill him . climbs the nearby bell tower and laughs as he watches the two cowardly gangs lunge and retreat at each other on the street . The gangs never make contact and are interrupted when an inspector comes inquiring about an official killed nearby ( actually killed by 's men ) . and promise to finish their clash later . return 's to 's tavern and watches out the window and then fawn over the inspector . Later , and his giant thug , ( ) , come into 's tavern and offer a position with him as a bodyguard . says he has many offers and has to think it over . Later still , when the wind is blowing gusts , a commotion surrounds the return of ( ) , 's youngest and deadliest sibling . has attained a pistol in his world travels and shows off with it by shooting at the town bell . That night , convinces that he will spy on . As a gratitude , offers her geishas to but he declines . Out on the street , happens upon two of 's drunken thugs he overheard talking in the tavern and tricks them into confessing they killed the official . He incapacitates them with his sword and ties them up , giving them to . He goes back to and says he caught the two conspiring with . In response , 's son is taken hostage by and 's thugs . Shortly thereafter , as watches from 's window , the two gangs meet in the street . A young man , ( ) and his young son ( ) , come into 's tavern and watch anxiously . There is a plan to exchange the two men for , but shoots the two men . In response , reveals he has a second bargaining chip as well , the beautiful ( ) . Nui is 's wife , but after he came to owe gambling money to , was pimped out to . has had to listen as ravishes every night . He is also regularly beaten by . When the two gangs agree to trade their hostages , a tense situation ensues as realizes her son and husband are at 's . Nui is dragged away from her family and back to 's and 's clutches . That night , finds out where is being kept and that six men are guarding her now . walks along with and reminds him that he needs to beat . Shortly after goes into to do so , rushes and tells that the six guards have been killed and that he must go back and tell and . When rushes off , burst in on and kills all six guards quickly . He burst in on and pulls out Nui and reconnects her with and their son . trashes the room to make it look like a struggle has occurred . When he returns outside , finds & tearfully bowing to him , much to his annoyance . He says he hates pathetic people and tells them he will kill them if they do n't run , which they promptly do . Seconds later , , and some of their thugs come back and are convinced that the massacre of the guards is the act of 's men . Shortly thereafter , 's silk warehouse is set on fire , and in response , 's sake storage is hacked open . walks into 's tavern and is surprised to see the usually grumpy old man beaming . It turns out has left a thank you note for rescuing them and is happy that is a good man underneath the gruff and violent exterior . However , enters the tavern and begins to grill . is able to take away 's sword and intercepts as he tries to take off 's note . While out looking for , had heard of helping them escape . is captured and beaten badly by and the rest of 's gang . Despite the continual beatings , refuses to disclose 's location ( which he does n't know ) . During a break in the beatings , the badly - injured hides in a chest in the room . and a cohort return and are bewildered that he 's not there . When rushes back to tell the others ( leaving the previously locked door open ) , crawls outside and gets under a nearby walkway just in time . 's whole gang desperately search for , not realizing he 's literally right under their feet . Seeing an opening , manages to crawl on to the street and to 's tavern . tells to tell 's men that he went to 's and hides in the corner of the tavern under some debris . When tells 's story , goes back to and pitches this situation as an change to finally eradicate and his men . Meanwhile , gets the cooper to place in a coffin so they can carry it off to a secure location . When and the cooper carry out in the coffin , he asks them to stop so he can peak out and view the chaos as finally eliminates . 's men have set 's brothel on fire , forcing all of 's out to shot by or slashed to death by 's men . Finally , , and their son come out surrendering . Despite being unarmed , they are brutally killed by and . While they watched the ghastly spectacle , the cowardly cooper has ran off . is forced to convince the now lone to help him carry the coffin containing . and carry to the graveyard , but dupes into going back into town to look for . takes refuge in a nearby temple . After several days of recovering , shows his returned skill by catching a floating leaf on a knife he throws . When hears somebody coming , he thinks it 's coming to bring him more food . But it 's actually the cooper and he tells that 's men captured carrying food and are beating him for 's location . Angrily , arms himself with a sword and a knife and marches into town . A beaten is seen hanging prostrate from a rope in the middle of town . Realizing that is there , the whole of 's gang gathers in the street . menacingly stomps towards them . pulls out his pistol and warns to stop . instead breaks into a sprint . Unosuke levels his gun at , but throws his knife into 's arm before he can even fire . With amazing speed , unsheathes his sword and lethally slashes 's whole gang , including , and himself . spares only one of 's cowering thugs , recognizing him as the son of the house where he wondering at the start . He tells him to " live a long life eating gruel ! " Lying in a puddle of his own blood , asks to hand him his pistol because he feels naked without it . When gives his pistol , grins and points it at , but it misfires , once he has lowered it , it fires . does n't flinch . dies . A crazed - looking comes out beating his drum and , seeing , suddenly stumbles across the street and kills him . cuts loose from the rope and tells him that the town should be " pretty quiet " now . says " See ya later " and walks off out of the now nearly empty town.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) and ( ) are down on their luck in and are both victims of a swindle in which workers are hired but not paid by a notoriously corrupt local businessman ( ) . Intrigued in the local pub by the stories of ( ) , an old burnt - out gold prospector keen on finding business partners to go prospecting , they can not join him because they do n't have enough money . When makes a small score in a local lottery , that changes , and they hook up with and set off for the hills . They find land on which much gold can be mined , and they split the gold equally , with each hiding and tending to his individual share . One day , sees a gila monster ( a venomous lizard ) and resolves to kill it , but it hides under a rock . will have to lift the rock to shoot it , but when , whose gold , coincidentally , is hidden under this same rock , sees lifting it , even after seeing the gila monster , he fears that his goods will soon be stolen by one of the others . When another man named ( ) finds them and insists on becoming their partners in prospecting , they resolve to shoot him . Before they do so , however , a group of bandits led by ( ) finds them and the bandits try to barter for some of their weapons , but these weapons are indispensable to the men and they refuse to do business . This results in exchange of gunfire , and , who helps to defend the men , is killed . The bandits are ultimately scared away , and gold prospecting continues until they have mined enough gold to be prosperous for the remainder of their lives . All that remains is to take their gold back to the city where they can sell it , but this will require an arduous trip through the desert . Early in the trip , , a man known to be skilled in the ways of medicine , is forced by some primitive local people to return with them to treat an ill child , and has little choice but to trust and to hold his share of the goods until he returns to them . has every intention of doing this , but remains suspicious of , believing that will kill him the very moment he goes to sleep . Troubled by this , he tries to murder , and soon holds all the goods , but he must now make a long trip through the desert alone . Unfortunately for , he encounters on his trip , and , who recognizes him , murders him and takes his goods . returns to the city to sell the goods , but once it is determined that he has stolen the goods he holds , he is executed by firing squad . When it turns out that has survived , and when returns , it soon becomes clear that their fortune is missing , and they share an unexpected laugh , appreciating that , despite their bad luck , they were far more prosperous than and . , and understood , would go on , and their unbroken spirit made them symbols of resolve in the face of adversity.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The credits are rolled to deeply ominous music with several false starts , interlaced with apologies for the inadequacies of each , during which numerous titlers are fired en masse . In the end , credits that are heavily laced with references to moose , llamas and other furry animals roll to highly festive Latin music . Little is to be seen but fog over a grassland while the sound of a galloping horsea sound that could only be made on cobblestone , but not grassis heard . From the fog emerge two pedestrians : ( ) , dressed in chain mail , a tunic and a crown ; and ( ) , who appears to be fulfilling the role of beast of burden , and is using two half - coconuts percussively . They approach a castle and perfectly mimics the sound of a galloping horse coming to a stop . Two guards become barely visible atop the castle wall . announces that he is looking for knights to join him at , and wishes to recruit the master of the castle . Unfortunately , the two guards are immediately distracted by 's half - coconut shells . tries to return the conversation to the quest , but the guards are unable to turn their attentions from the possible causes for coconuts appearing in ( ) , as claims that they found them there , or how a bird , or a set of birds , might have brought one up from the tropics . , and emulate riding off . The scene changes to a plague village . A cart is being drawn through the streets , and is attended by a disheveled man ( ) who strikes a triangle and calls for the residents to " bring out your dead . " A peasant ( ) tries to lay a decrepit man on the cart , without calling attention to the fact that he is still alive . The attendant refuses to accept living cargo ( citing regulations ) . When the peasant tries to abstractly request a favour , the attendant looks up and down the street to make sure there are no witnesses , and strikes the elderly subject a deadly blow to the head , solving the problem . The cart and the peasant continue on their ways . and emulate a ride through the village , and the attendant correctly infers that is a king from the fact that he is not covered in shit . On a hillside , near a castle , approaches a peasant ( ) from behind and calls out " Old woman ! " The peasant , , barely turns his head to correct the king with " man ! " Rather than killing this vulgar subject on the spot for such gross insubordination , tries to apologize for the mistake . Unimpressed , then launches into a rant , making it very clear that he has harboured a great deal of bitterness over the class system , which he has experienced from the bottom all his life ( of 37 years ) . is challenged to justify his kingship , and to an accompaniment of heavenly voices , tells the tale of the of the presenting with . confidently challenges this presumption of political legitimacy . Focusing on the executive branch , he asserts that it must " derive from a mandate from the masses . " can only respond by barking orders that the peasant be silent . Unaffected , continues his elocution of democratic dogma , at which point manhandles him . This only encourages ; he becomes a raving firebrand , and tries to call as much attention as possible to 's assault . The king accepts that he can not adequately assert this authority in this situation , and relinquishes with " Bloody peasant ! " , despite his anger , appears delighted at this parting shot , and its significance to his message . He seeks validation from the gathering crowd . While travelling through a forest , and encounter an epic battle between two armoured , faceless men . The weapons : swords , an anointed mace , and an axe . When the black - clad knight ( ) runs his opponent through the face , he retrieves his sword and then simply stands tall . approaches him and praises him for his performance . The knight neither speaks a word , nor even turns his gaze towards the king . Despite this insolence , again does not respond with homicide , but invites the knight to enter his court . When no response is given , announces that he will continue on his quest . The knight then speaks with a deep voice and economy of words , repeating " None shall pass , " forbidding to cross the bridge before which he is standing . This bridge would allow the party to cross a gully no more than 10 feet wide . and the knight draw their swords , and a much less epic battle ensues . When severs one of the knight 's arms , he is unwilling to accept defeat . relieves the knight of his other arm and kneels down to offer a prayer of thanks . The knight kicks him over . The now completely unarmed knight drops his ominous mystique , and childishly goads into chopping off his remaining limbs . As the knight can no longer obstruct , he and ride off , ignoring the knight 's continued challenges . A group of monks are chanting in while hitting themselves with wooden boards as they traverse a village which looks much like the plague village . A frenzied mob drags a lady accused of being a witch ( ) to ( ) , who is performing an experiment involving a coconut tied to a bird . They present their case based on the way she is dressed , the funnel on her head , and the parsnip tied over her nose . They also present testimony from a peasant ( ) who had been turned into a newt ( or so he claims ) . proceeds to deduce the validity of their charge in his own way , after making the villagers admit that they put a fake nose on the witch . Using a scientific method befitting the of , he develops a formula for identifying a witch based on the flammability and buoyancy of various objects and materials . The crowd becomes very quiet and still , probably because is overtaxing their intelligence . It is eventually reasoned that the weight of the accused compared to that of a duck determines whether she is a witch . Remembering their original purpose , they return to their frenzy and carry her off to be weighed . As she is heavier than a duck , she is taken to be burnt as a witch . Right afterwards , approaches . When identifies himself , bows to the king , and is then knightedCamelot has its first knight . We are hurried through the recruitment of the remaining knights by the of the . They are the ( ) , the Pure ( ) ( also called " the " ) , the - not - quite - so - brave - as - Sir - ( ) , and the aptly named Not - appearing - in - this - film ( a baby ( ) suited up in chain party emulates riding to and when they spy it from a distance , they stop to appreciate its majesty . We are treated to a song and dance routine performed by the knights , presumably within the castle walls . This includes an interlude with tap - dancing , and a percussion solo . Even the decrepit shell of a man ( ) suspended by his wrists in the dungeon below manages to pathetically cheer the upbeat celebrations upstairs . We are then returned to the outside of , at the same distance from the castle . seems to have had the same perception we have just had , since he elects to avoid , calling it a " silly place . "As and company ride to some unknown destination , a low - budget animation of the appears in the sky . He is not willing to suffer fools gladly , and when done chastising for his obsequiousness , charges with seeking the . Thus , the for the begins , as manifested by another animation sequence with images reminiscent of medieval art . Our heroes encounter a castle with a French taunter ( ) who taunts them with random names like " Daffy English knights " ( unaware that " knight " has silent letters , and only one " n " ) and makes up flowery insults such as " I fart in your general direction ! " and " Your mother was a hamster and your father smelled of elderberries ! " Whether this man is French is unclear , since his - talking colleagues appear to understand English words more readily than French ones , and his accent slips when shouting " I 'm French ! " gives the same terms to the inhabitants of the castle as he did with the first one he approached , including , of course , the part involving the . The claims that they already have a grail , but then indicates to his peers that this is a mischievous fabrication . Half - stunned , asks to see it . The guard rejects the request with his typical inane derision . then takes a more aggressive posture , and in mid - threat , the French launch a cow from what sounds like a catapult at 's party , landing on one of them . With all possible gusto , orders a charge , and they all attack the castle walls ( several feet high ) with nothing more effective than swords . 's party is treated to a barrage of livestock . orders a retreat , but since he does not know the meaning of the word , he uses a different expression . The taunter hears battle noises , but there is nothing to see . 's keen mind hatches a plan : a giant hare made of wood known as a is wheeled towards the castle . The French understand that it is intended as a present for them , and then cautiously bring it into the castle . explains the remainder of his plans ... but at this point he realizes that he forgot the step where the knights are supposed to climb into the rabbit , before it is to be presented to the enemy . Using the same technology as before , the wooden colossus is sent over the castle walls , killing one of the servants ( clapperboard is snapped in front of " a famous historian " ( ) wearing a modern suit and tie , who narrates some unseen details of 's experience with the , and then informs us that the king decided that he and his knights should search for the individually . Anything else he was going to tell us is cut short when an unidentified knight on horseback slashes his neck . The historian 's wife shows up crying for help . After they split up , travels through a forest with his favourite minstrels . The vocal one sings of 's bravery , and describes in graphic detail the various ordeals that is prepared to face . Just as the minstrel is about to sing of the gory treatment 's penis could withstand , gracefully orders them silent . They immediately encounter a three - headed giant ( , , and ) . The giant interrogates , who wishes to discreetly downplay his significance , but his minstrel sings of 's identity and credentials . One of the heads wishes to cut 's head off , but the heads immediately descend into bickering about each others ' lifestyles and various things completely unrelated to . When they finally agree on their next course of action , they see that is no longer available . has continued on the quest , and his minstrel sings a song that absurdly describes his 's brave cowardice , over 's objections . , wet , weary , and probably depleted of much of his short - term vitality , follows a - shaped light to . There he finds a colony of robe - clad teens , who will not hear of any talk about a , but insist on tending to what they perceive to be 's immediate needsthey decide that they are medical . is shy , and finds the strength to resist temptation , and again demands to see the . At this point a girl named ( ) realizes that one of their rules has been broken , for which must administer the punishment . describes the punishment , which expands to include more and more inhabitants of the castle , and becomes increasingly sexual . finally seems willing to accept their hospitality , but then his friends storm the castle and rescue him . As he is being rescued he insists on remaining to fight the perils alone , but they valiantly stand by him , thinking only of his safety . The heroes leave a castle full of very frustrated girls ( , , and the famous " 24 , " and are in a hut trying to extract information about the from a frighteningly withered old man ( ) , who can only cackle insanely to 's questions . A fire burns in the middle of the room . Eventually the miscreation speaks , but does not answer 's questions directly . He does speak of an enchanter and the of . The old man disappears , as does the hutalong with any indication of civilization , save the fire . 's party progresses through a foggy forest to the accompaniment of stressful music , while makes anxious glances to the left and the right . The stress is brought to its natural end when they find themselves before a knight ( ) who 's approximately twice the height of . He is surrounded by several other armoured men who lumber about like animals . They are the who say " ! " They do indeed say " ! " as a form of intimidation and coercion , and liberally use it on at the slightest provocation , and also dread using the word " it . " They demand a shrubbery from on pain of death . Meanwhile , a group of modern - day police officers conduct an investigation of the murder of the famous historian , and interview a woman ( ) who was close to him . The of ( ) brags ( in a accent ) about how he managed to build a castle on the worst possible terrain he could find , and brashly admits that the first few attempts were complete failures . He then explains to his son , ( ) , that the acquisition of more land is essential to their kingdom , which is why he must marry a princess who is connected to a great deal of it . has a horribly pale complexion , and is so effeminate that his own father mistakes him for someone called . is reluctant to participate in this land - grab , and wishes to express himself in song , but the king shouts down the erupting music and forbids to sing . The king impatiently closes the discussion and storms off . As he prepares to leave the room , he orders two guards to watch . Unfortunately , the guard with speaking parts ( ) has a very hard time processing the phrase " stay here and make sure he does n't leave . " When the king finally leaves , melancholy music erupts , and the king returns to repeat his prohibition on singing . then tries to inconspicuously write a note , tie it to an arrow and shoot it through a window to the outside . The guards see what he is doing , but appear oblivious to the ramifications . discovers the note when the arrow it is tied to buries itself in the chest of his servant , ( ) . The message is from someone pleading to be rescued from a forced marriage . Lancelot enthusiastically assumes that this is part of his quest for the , and resolves to rescue what he thinks is a maiden . He charges into the castle and attacks several members of a wedding party , including the father of the bride and as many unarmed guards as he can . When he takes too many seconds between killing people , he attacks a wall - hanging . He bursts into 's room , and then kills the guards while one of them tries to recall the instructions his king gave him , and how they might relate to the newcomer . The king appears and expresses his displeasure at the disruption that has caused . However , when he learns that is from , he appears to believe that can provide some unspecified gain in lieu of . After severing the linens that is currently using to make his escape down the castle walls , the king escorts out of the room , while making friendly conversation . The king tries to introduce to the crowd , but their predictable hostility excites into combat once again , and he kills a few more people before the king can calm him down . The king explains the new arrangement involving the princess and her holdings , which somehow depends on the death of her father . When her father appears to be recovering from 's attack , he motions to one of his guards , who approaches the father of the bride . The king delivers a narrative of the princess 's father succumbing to his wounds , and surely enough , he dies . then appears in the castle , apparently in good health , which irritates his father . His irritation escalates when begins to explain his ordeal in song . appears and suggests that return to the quest . Lancelot insists on a melodramatic exit , and then swings across the room from a rope . Somehow the stunt fails , and he is left dangling above the centre of the room . While riding into yet another provincial village , meets the ( ) . She is asked about a shrubbery , but appears terrified by the inquiry , and refuses to cooperate . With some reluctance about the optics of such a spectacle , and coerce her with the word " ! " Fortunately , the ( ) boldly happens by , and both parties are satisfied . and return to the dreaded who say " ! " but find that their name has been changed ( to something so complex and random it was probably ad libbed , and therefore can not be repeated here ) . The who ( so recently ) said " ! " charge with another useless errand and an impossible task . The eccentric are defeated by 's accidental discovery of a secret word which is their weakness . and his musically sardonic minstrels then appear on the scene . They ride off together . In the modern world , the police continue their investigation of the historian 's murder . Back in the world , the adventurers each overcome their perils and reunite to face a bleak and terrible winter ( which they survive by eating 's reunited party ventures further to find the enchanter named ( ) . the appears as a Scots - talking middle - aged man but commands great powers of pyrokinesis , has a very long , grey - streaked beard , and on his head either wears 's horns , or grows them there . He is also able to withstand long awkward silences , doing nothing to break them . and his party are in awe of and his spectacular display of pyrotechnics , and find themselves flustered when asking him for help , as per the instructions of the from 24 . promises to help with their next phase of intelligence gathering and beckons the party follow him . After one step , he abruptly turns around and speaks of a terrible monster . The longer he spends on the warning , the more foolish he appears . 's fearful respect for the enchanter is diminishing . The company approaches a rock - encircled clearing beyond which is the mouth of a cave that breathes smoke . Skeletons litter the scene . The tension jumps when sights the monster . When the knights realize that the monster is an average - looking rabbit , the tension immediately turns to annoyance and scorn . ( ) , ordered to dispatch the creature , sets forth to perform the task as casually as a short - order cook would perform his craft . The rabbit leaps about six feet to bite off 's head before the knight even raises his sword . feels vindicated and expresses it as would an 11 - year - old . , believing a full scale attack is sufficient to accomplish the task , orders one . When several knights die in the attempt , he orders a retreat ( in his own unique regards the carnage with scorn of his ownwild chortling . When someone recalls the of , calls to ( ) , who is seen with his entourage a stone's - throw away , but off - camera until this scene . They consult with his order 's exhaustive canon on use of the weapon , the of , verses 9 - 21 , describing how to use the grenade ( " And raised the hand grenade up on high , saying , ' O , bless this thy hand grenade , that with it thine enemies to tiny bits , in thy mercy . ' And the did grin . And the people did feast upon the lambs and sloths , and carp and anchovies , and orangutans and breakfast cereals , and fruit - bats and large chu[Cleric is told to skip forward by the spake , saying , ' First shalt thou take out the . Then shalt thou count to three , no more , no less . Three shall be the number thou shalt count , and the number of the counting shall be three . Four shalt thou not count , neither count two , excepting that thou then proceed to three . Five is right out . Once the number three , being the third number , be reached , then lobbest thou of towards foe , who , being naughty in my sight , shall snuff it . ' ) After a miscount , the grenade is thrown at the rabbit , and a thundering explosion alerts the police , who are already looking for a murderer . In the cave beyond the rabbit , writing is found , which translates . Finally , they receive concrete instructions on where to find the Grail : the " of " . While they are trying to deduce the meaning of the text , the knights are ambushed by the ( Animated ) of . The human party ( also animated ) are chased about the cave , and are only saved when the animator ( ) suffers a fatal heart attack . In the modern world , the police discover the gruesome scene at the cave entrance . They assume it 's a homicide , and not an animal attack . 's party approaches the of that is guarded by the from 24 . orders to face the deadly quiz that the will give him , but deflects the order . makes the first attempt , and when the party sees that the challenge is as difficult as answering a few superficial personal questions , finds his bravery renewed , and volunteers to be the next participant . Unfortunately , the last question asked involves geographical trivia that would have been very rare knowledge in the , and is thrown into the of . Then flubs his answer and is also lost . When is asked a question about aerodynamics ( involving the redundant " airspeed velocity " ) , he solves the problem by answering it with a specific question ( which the Bridgekeeper can not answer ) . The is cast into the pit , and the way is clear . and search for , but he is not to be found . In fact , he has his hands pressed against a police car and is being searched . The king and his remaining free knight are called by an ethereal song . They are drawn over misty mountains to a lake . To a majestic , brass - rich soundtrack , a barge with the head of a monster transports our heroes across the water to the island of the . As the music reaches crescendo , the men disembark and kneel . , mounting his sword tip on the ground , offers the a solemn prayer . The music is interrupted by the sound of a catapult being discharged . 's speech switches from prayer to blasphemy as a sheep lands on them . The Taunting appears atop the castle wall and offers his usual insolence . launches into orders , threats , and expressions of indignation invoking 's name . The French respond with human waste . Humiliated and soiled , and walk back through the water to the mainland as the French taunt at will . Reaching the other side of the lake , shouts to an unseen party to stand ready . To the sound of a military drum , emerging on a nearby ridge , soldiers numbering maybe 1,000 form a line of battle nearly as many feet in . They are well equipped . shouts a deadly oath across the lake to the who persist in their taunts . Without hesitation , orders a charge , and the company surges forward . As the soldiers approach the shore on the mainland , they are cut off by just two modern - day police cars . The line of battle has shrunk to less than 100 feet , and and are arrested . At least three of the officers start pushing back the crowd and confiscate an " offensive weapon . " The film breaks in the projector and runs out of the gate , putting an abrupt end to the movie . For the duration of the film , there are several minutes of organ music but no end credits.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The year is 1943 . During , the have built a special , or prison camp , designed to house their most troublesome prisoners of war , the ones who make repeated escape attempts . Arriving at the new camp , many of the mostly British prisoners begin immediately to assess its security and begin planning escapes . One American prisoner , ( ) quickly finds a place along the fence where it was difficult for the German guards in the towers to see , and casually tosses his ever - present baseball toward the fence in order to test the , and stepping over the warning wire gets a few machine - gun bullets fired at his feet . Others try different escape tactics ; several hide themselves in trucks full of brush as they drive towards the gate , and two of the men even try infiltrating a group of Russian workers marching out of the camp , while two men stage a fight as a diversion . All are quickly found and rooted out , with and a named Ives being thrown into the " cooler " , a isolation cell at the far side of the camp . All this in the first 20 minutes after they arrive . Hilts and become friends during their stay in the cooler . After the initial excitement , the POW 's begin to make more cohesive plans . The ranking officer of the group , ( ) has a meeting with the , who assures him escape is impossible , and it would be in everyone 's best interest if they would all accept their situation , settle down , and sit out the remainder of the war " as comfortably as possible " . must however remind the that it is the sworn duty of all the prisoners to try to escape , thus forcing the to use their finite resources and manpower guarding the prisoners , or chasing them down if they succeed in escaping . A few hours later , men bring ( ) to the camp , as he is a officer and therefore the responsibility of the , not the . The officer promises that he will be shot if he is caught escaping again , and then leaves . , the leader of many prior escape attempts and nicknamed " X " by the other British officers , realizes that by putting all their problem prisoners in one camp , the have unwittingly created a fine escape team . Between them , the POW 's have considerable experience in tunneling , and have made many escape attempts . quickly organizes everyone into teams and get them all to work . Some , like " King " ( ) begin digging , while " " ( ) begins to gather the materials needed to make everything work for an audacious escape by up to 250 prisoners , far more than had ever escaped at once before . Other men are assigned to make uniforms , forge paperwork , and get to know the German guards and their habits . plans to dig three tunnels , over 300 feet long , so that there will be other tunnels to use if one is discovered . After a couple of weeks in the cooler , and Ives are released , and meet with the others . Hilts has his own plan to dig out , a idea that is so simple it just might work , and he intends to try it that night . Wishing him the best , the main team realizes that Hilts may not succeed , but he 'll at least distract the from the other attempts . Hilts and Ives start under the fence that night , but they are caught and the next morning they are back in the cooler again . Meanwhile , other prisoners are working on the main escape attempt . ( ) is the forger of the group , and works on fake papers , while the ( ) creates amazing tools from scrap metal scavenged around the camp . - ( ) has figured out a way to get rid of all the dirt they 're bringing up out of the tunnels , by placing it in bags inside their pants , and then scattering it outside . Hundreds of other men help out in other ways . Some establish gardens where dirt may be scattered , and also receive gardening tools that can be repurposed for the escape . Some scavenge wood and other materials from unused beds . Other men march , sing , and otherwise make noise to drown out the sounds made by the men making equipment and digging . Many men act as lookouts , passing signals when the guards approach , so that the men working have plenty of time to shut down their operations without being noticed . Others stage diversions to distract the so that tools and other items may be stolen . Still others simply get in the way , hindering the ' routine inspections and gaining precious minutes for the others to avoid being caught . befriends a young , naive German guard named . He tempts into sharing coffee and chocolate with him , and takes the opportunity to steal 's wallet , knowing that does not dare report the theft , since doing so would effectively be admitting socializing with prisoners , an offense which would get him sent to possible death on the . The wallet contains , among other items , 's identity card , military paperwork , an ( permission to be on government property ) , all items that the forgers need for their work . Later , is able to use the theft to blackmail into providing him with a camera that requested . The tunnels get a few feet longer every day , despite stress and fraying tempers , repeated German inspections , and the occasional cave - in underground . The men go to increasing lengths to gather more and more wood to shore up the tunnels . decides to concentrate all their efforts on one tunnel for the time being . Hilts is released from the cooler again , and meets with . He says he intends to try again on 7 , the next new moon . tells Hilts that the men working on the main escape plan still know little of the local geography , and asks Hilts to help by making maps of the area around the camp when he escapes , also getting information about the schedules at the nearest train station , even if it means being caught and returned to the cooler . Hilts prefers to act as a " lone wolf " or with his friend Ives , and refuses outright . He and the other in the camp begin to distill alcohol from potatoes grown in the gardens . On the 4th of , they surprise everyone with gallons of moonshine . A much - needed party breaks out as the prisoners gather outside for a few drinks , while the look on with consternation , having missed the party preparations completely . However , the guards discover the first tunnel during a routine inspection that day . At the height of their celebration the men are suddenly crushed to learn that their greatest hope of escape is now gone . Ives , who had been slowly losing hope , finally cracks and charges the fence , only to be shot and killed . Bitterly resigned , tersely tells the men to continue quietly on one of the other tunnels . Hilts , having seen his friend gunned down , changes his mind and decides to help , by making the maps he needs . He escapes at the blind spot he saw at the beginning , and turns himself in the next day . Though he 's sent to the cooler again , he has the information that needed . Work continues on the second tunnel at a frantic pace . The men practice their assumed identities and their German , including one man taking a grave risk by dressing as a German soldier ( he could be shot as a spy if caught this way ) . discovers that his eyesight has been ruined by all the close - up forging work ; he can not see more than a few inches from his face . He tries to hide his disability from the others , but he does not fool anyone . admits to his friend that he is claustrophobic , and can not take the fear of digging in the tunnels any longer , and intends to try to escape through the fence . Willie talks him out of it , promising to stay with all the way during the escape . Likewise , promises to take care of during the escape , despite 's misgiving about letting the blind escape . By the time is released again , the main group is nearly ready . Their clothes have been tailored to make them look like civilians , they have their fake IDs and other forged papers , and they know where to run , thanks to . That night is the night of the escape . In the tunnels , 's claustrophobia gets the better of him , and he returns to the hut , though he will escape later . Hilts digs the last few feet up to the surface at the end of the tunnel and cautiously pokes his head out , but he finds they 've miscalculated ; they 're 20 feet short of the woods , and now they must try to sneak across open ground without being seen . All the forged travel permits bear the next day 's date ; they can not postpone without starting the plan over from scratch . Hilts sets up a rope signal from the woods , and men start to enter the tunnel . Carefully timing the passes of the guards , men begin to escape into the woods . During an air raid , the turn off all the lights , enabling many men to escape during the period of darkness . Afterward , they return to the rope signal . This is a time - consuming process , and and his friend must leave their post at the end of the tunnel if they intend to catch their train , passing the instructions regarding the rope signal from man to man . One man stumbles upon exiting the hole , and a guard hears him , though he does not see anything . The next man grows impatient waiting for the rope signal , which Hilts can not give until the guard leaves the area . He makes a run for it anyway , and the guard sees him , thus stopping the breakout . In the morning , the do a head count and determine that 76 prisoners escaped . Guards and police scour the countryside looking for the prisoners . As the morning train pulls into the station , many of the men are waiting in their disguises , and they quietly get aboard . Others are making their getaway by other means . , the , steals a bicycle . Hilts strings a wire across a rural road , knocking a German soldier off his motorcycle , which Hilts then steals , along with the 's uniform . He heads for neutral . and find a rowboat and begin rowing downriver . Others follow the roads , walking or hitchhiking . One is picked up quickly at a roadblock , and as the day progresses , many other prisoners are recaptured , one by one . On the train , the men discover that the and the are on board . and pose as and fool the police ; and jump from the train instead rather than take the risk . Meanwhile , stows away on board another train . Hilts kicks a German policeman at a roadblock and makes a brazen escape on his stolen motorcycle , eventually losing his pursuers on a farm , where he discards the uniform . He eventually comes within sight of the Swiss border , but finding the crossing heavily guarded , makes a run for it cross country on the motorcycle . Again , the chase him . Cornered at the border fence , he makes a daring jump over the fence but becomes entangled in the barbed wire , and surrenders , showing the his dog tag so that they do not think he is a spy . The first train reaches its destination ; , , and - disembark to get ready for the next leg of their trip . The officer who threatened with death at the beginning just happens to be there , and he recognizes . - , realizing what is happening , tackles the officer and shoots him with his own gun , even though he knows he will be quickly shot dead by other policemen in the vicinity , he has sacrificed his own life to save . and , traveling overland , arrive at an air base , ambush a guard and steal a small airplane , although they are seen doing so . They fly towards . Unfortunately , the plane develops mechanical problems before they get there , and the plane crashes . and are not seriously injured , but German soldiers arrive on the scene almost immediately . can not see them , and they shoot him dead . is recaptured . , now in , witnesses three German soldiers killed in a drive - by shooting at an outdoor cafe by French resistance guerrillas . The proprietor , who was in on the " hit " , agrees to help escape to . Meanwhile , and , still posing as , attempt to board a bus for the next leg of their trip . is tricked when a Gestapo officer addresses him in , and makes the mistake of replying in , blowing their cover . He and must make a run for it . is quickly cornered . almost gets away , deceiving several soldiers by speaking perfect German when they confront him . Unfortunately , a nearby SS officer recognized him as having spoken French earlier , and he is recaptured . Eventually , most of the escapees have been rounded up by the . As they ride back towards the camp in trucks , fifty prisoners are diverted in another direction , where , who 'd led all his men in the escape , confesses that even though they 've failed the affair has been exhilarating . " I 've never been happier " , he says during a rest stop in an open field . The prisoners turn at the sound of a machine gun bolt , and as they stand helpless , the guards gun them all down in cold - blooded murder . The remaining captured prisoners are returned to the camp , and the names of those murdered are read off in a memorial service . Three prisoners escape . and eventually reach a seaport in their rowboat and board a ship bound for , while the French guerrillas help to the Spanish border , where another man meets him to guide him into . The of the prison camp is cashiered and taken away in disgrace , and replaced by another officer , punishment for the escape happening on his watch . At the same time , is returned to the camp . Bruised , bloody , but unbowed , he marches defiantly back into the camp and learns of the murder of most of the other escapees . Staggered at the news , he is hauled off to the cooler . He is locked up in his usual room , and the guard hears Hilts playing with his baseball . The , who does n't understand baseball , walks away . The movie ends with the notice that it is dedicated to the fifty men who were murdered.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The film opens with a shot of desolate , wide - open country in in 1980 . In a voice - over , the local sheriff , ( ) , tells of the changing times : in the old days , some sheriffs never wore guns , as did his late father , who was the sheriff before him ; in the modern day and age , however , once sent an unrepentant teenage boy to the electric chair who had killed a girl simply because he wanted to kill someone , had been " fixin ' " to do it for some time , and would do it again if he had the chance . Along a desert highway , ( ) is arrested by a deputy ( ) . They return to the empty police station , where the deputy calls . He tells the about an odd device in 's possession ( a captive bolt pistol ) . The deputy thinks it may be an oxygen tank , but it is actually a device used to kill cattle in the slaughter house . The deputy has his back to , who sneaks up behind him and just as the deputy hangs up the phone , uses the handcuff chain to garrote the deputy . After cleaning himself up in the station bathroom , steals a squad car and once on a desert highway , uses the car 's lights and siren to stop a random motorist ( ) driving a sedan . He politely asks the man to step out of the car . then asks the man to hold still and presses the captive bolt pistol attached to the compressed air tank against the puzzled driver 's forehead . He squeezes the trigger and it fires the bolt into the man 's skull , killing him . drives off in the man 's car . Elsewhere in the desert , ( ) is hunting pronghorns . Setting the sights of his hunting rifle on one , he fires , scattering the animals . Walking to where the herd stood , he notices a trail of blood . Realizing the pronghorn left in a different direction from the blood trail , he spies a wounded pit bull hobbling away . Retracing the dog 's trail , eventually comes upon several pickup trucks parked in the middle of the wilderness . Mexican criminals and pit bulls lie dead on the ground ; only a mortally wounded driver remains alive . The driver begs for , but says that he has no water . asks the man where the " last man standing " - the winner - is , but does n't get an answer . He carefully takes the man 's submachine gun off the seat and a magazine from his shirt pocket . Under a tarp in the bed of one pickup , sees what appears to be a great deal of heroin . Moss tracks the only criminal to have escaped the shootout to a tree where he finds the man has died . He finds a large catalog case filled with two million dollars and a .45 caliber pistol . He takes the money and gun . He returns home where he hides the submachine gun under his mobile home . His wife ( ) is irritated that he has been gone all day and he refuses to tell her where he found the pistol and catalog case . She asks him what 's in the case but does n't believe him when he off - handedly tells her it 's full of money . That night , guiltily wakes up , deciding that he should take water to the wounded driver . He arrives around dawn and parks a short distance away on a rise . He carries a gallon of water to the scene of the shootout , but discovers that the wounded man has been killed by a shotgun round to his head . Looking back to where he 'd parked his pickup truck atop the rise , dimly sees in the predawn light another truck now parked alongside his . Two men get out and appear to slash his truck 's tires . He tries to hide behind under one of the trucks , but is fired upon by the men who are now approaching in their truck , using bright searchlights . More gunmen appear , disable his truck and fire on him , hitting him in the shoulder . Moss flees with the pickup pursuing him , but is hit in the shoulder by a shotgun round just as he reaches a river embankment . As Moss tumbles towards the river with dawn breaking , the two men , apparently , send a pit bull after him . Evading continued gunfire , dives into the river and swims downstream , eventually crossing to the other side with the pit bull gaining on him . On the opposite bank , frantically ejects an empty shell from the .45 , reloads the gun , and kills the dog at the moment it leaps at him . He bandages his wounds , realizing he is facing dangerous individuals . He returns home and sends to stay with her mother in while he travels separately with the money . After filling up at a gas station in the dead man 's , goes to pay for some candy from the gas proprietor ( ) . The proprietor tries to make polite conversation out of simple friendliness , but is upset at the inane small talk , and the owner finds himself in a strange , tense confrontation . The man is genuinely perplexed by his customer 's anxiety , and tries to defuse the argument by saying he needs to close the station , which only further irritates due to it being still midday . requires him to call the flip of coin to decide whether the man is to win everything , apparently whether the man will live or die . The clerk guesses heads and gives the man the coin . He tells him not to mix it with any other coins . Later that night , two well - dressed men take to the site of the failed drug deal . He removes the VIN tag from 's truck door and examines the corpses . The well - dressed men give him a tracking device on which they said they 're getting " not a bleep . " that he can use to find the catalog case of money , which has a transponder hidden in it , although it has not received any signals . picks up a pistol laying next to one dead men and kills both of them . The following morning , ( ) and ( ) respond to a report of a burning car , and recognize the belonging to the dead motorist . They follow tire tracks to the shoot out site , where recognizes 's truck . He and carefully look over the scene and then decide to call in federal authorities . The heroin is gone from the back of the pickup . appears at and 's trailer and uses the captive bolt pistol to break the lock . The trailer is empty but hurriedly vacated , but he finds in the unopened mail a phone bill that reveals the couple has made a lot of calls to , . He tries to intimidate the trailer park manager ( ) into revealing where works and seems to contemplate killing her , but when he hears noise in the adjacent room , leaves . puts his wife on a bus and reassures her that he will call her in a couple of days . He takes a cab from the bus station to a motel , where he rents a room and hides the money case deep in the duct using the clothes bar from a closet . leaves the hotel and buys boots and socks . takes a cab back to his motel but a truck parked near his room makes him suspicious and he directs the driver to take him to another motel . meanwhile calls numbers on the phone bill to try to figure out where is headed . He then begins driving , trying to anticipate where is headed . The next morning purchases a tent for its poles , duct tape , wire cutters , and a 12 gauge shotgun and ammo at a local sporting goods store . He returns to the second hotel room , where he saws off the shotgun barrel and stock . He returns to his first hotel and rents a second room immediately behind his first room . It shares the duct with his first room . In the second room , he uses the tent poles , duct tape , and coat hangers to fashion a hook that he uses to retrieve the catalog case full of money from the duct . is driving past the motel when the tracking device goes off . He finds the motel , and by the frequency of its beeping he deduces which room the signal is coming from , 's first room . rents a room and takes off his boots so he can quietly walk up to the room where the signal is coming from . He uses his captive bolt pistol to break into the room . finds three in the room and kills them with a suppressed shotgun . The ' gunfire alerts in the opposite room . searches the room for the case , finally noticing the duct . He opens it to see the tracks where the case was dragged . escapes into the dark with the money and hitchhikes out of the area . The driver ( ) who picks him up tells him he should n't be hitch - hiking because it 's dangerous . The next day , in a high - rise office building in , a bounty hunter named ( ) arrives in a businessman 's ( ) large office . The businessman is upset about the many killings perpetrated by . He wants to contain the situation . tells the businessman that he has had past dealings with and would know him by sight . also compares to the bubonic plague and calls him a psychopathic killer . The businessman hires to control the " situation " with and to retrieve the money . In a border town , rents a room in an older , rundown multistory hotel . Unable to sleep , he is apparently trying to figure out how tracked him down to the previous motel . He searches the case and finds the transponder that has been using to find him . He hears suspicious noises and calls the clerk who had checked him in at the front desk . The clerk ( ) had told he 'd be on until the next morning at 10 a.m. , but he does n't answer . He sees the shadow of feet under his door , but then the hall lights go dark . shoots out the lock with the captive bolt pistol , hitting , who fires his shotgun into the door . then drops the case out the second story window and follows it . shoots at him from the window but misses . is wounded in the side by the door lock . stops a pick - up truck driver ( ) and tells him to drive him out of there , but kills the driver . Moss ducks down and drives the truck around a corner , crashing into a vehicle . He hides behind a nearby car , watching in a store window for whoever is following him . He shoots and wounds . Wounded himself , drives the pick - up to the nearby where he buys a jacket from some passing youths on the border bridge , and he also tosses the money case into some brush along the bank . He covers his bloody shirt with the jacket and , posing as a " drunk Mexican " waves the bottle of beer drunkenly at the half - sleeping Mexican border guard as he stumbles past to cross over into ; the sleepy guard is unconcerned with his identity . In the morning he is awakened by members of a who he pays to take him to a hospital . continues to be disturbed by what he saw in the desert and the apparently deteriorating state of morals in the world . He goes to visit in and asks her to put him in touch with her husband . Almost absentmindedly , he tells her how a local farmer was nearly killed by an animal he was trying to slaughter , and how slaughterhouses now used compressed air guns to kill cattle immediately . In the border town , , wounded in the thigh by a buckshot round , sets a car on fire as a diversion and nonchalantly steals medical supplies . In a motel room , he cuts off his pants and treats his wound . visits in the Mexican hospital and suggests that he just hand over the money so can protect him . refuses and tells him in which hotel he is staying . On the way back across the border , sees the catalog case from the bridge . Back at his hotel , the same one at which was staying , is confronted by . tries to strike a deal with for his life but when the phone rings , kills him . is on the phone , and tells him that if he brings him the money , he wo n't kill his wife , though he ca n't do the same for . lets know that he knows exactly where he is and , instead of coming to kill him in the hospital , he is going to go to 's mother 's house . tells he will kill him then hangs up . leaves the hospital and retrieves the case . He calls at her mother 's in and tells her to fly to to meet him . meanwhile goes to where he kills the businessman for hiring not only but the as well . His truck breaks down and a chicken farmer ( ) with a flatbed full of chicken cages stops to help . asks where the nearest airport is . The farmer names , and asks him if the chicken cages can be removed from the truck . Sometime later he is washing the chicken feathers off the back of the truck at a car wash . The who have been watching in follow her and her mother ( ) to the airport . One of the helps her mother with her luggage and she tells him she and are going to . The asks her what hotel she and her mother are staying at , so as to figure out 's location , and she tells him . In the airport , calls and tells him where is staying in . At the hotel , a woman ( ) sun - bathing by the pool flirts with . She invites him to her room for beer , but he says that he 's married and that he knows what beer leads to , and declines her offer . is driving up to 's motel when he hears automatic gunfire and sees a pickup truck speeding off . At the motel , sees a large number of empty shell casings on the ground by the pool , where a woman is floating dead . He then sees dead in the open doorway of his room . The money case is missing . All can do is comfort when she arrives . Later that night , and the local sheriff ( ) have coffee and bemoan the declining morals of American society . Afterward , returns to the motel and nearly misses being killed by who had been searching the room for the money case . visits his uncle , ( ) to tell him he 's retiring because he is too disturbed by the violence he 's seen . tells him he 's being vain and relates the story about how 's grandfather had died : shot by 8 outlaws , he bled to death in his wife 's arms on his front porch as they watched . Meanwhile , visits , who has just buried her mother . She understands why he 's there but still finds it meaningless . flips a coin but refuses to play his game . dismisses 's game , saying that he 's the one who decides on whether or not to kill her , not the coin . He is unmoved , however , insisting on his lack of a free choice in the matter . During this exchange , we see two boys ride past the house on bicycles . leaves the house and stops to check his boots , apparently for blood . Driving off , he is looking at the same two boys in the rear view mirror when he 's struck broadside by a car speeding through the intersection . gets out of his car , his arm bone protruding out of his elbow . The two neighborhood boys come up to him to see if he 's all right . pays one of the kids for his shirt , which he uses to make a sling for his arm , and he asks them to tell the authorities that he had already left . limps away down the street . At 's house , the sheriff ponders what to do for the day at breakfast with his wife , ( ) ; he is restless in retirement , but she rebuffs his offer to help out around the house , as he will just throw off her established routine . He recounts a dream he had about his sheriff father . dreamed that he and his father were riding a mountain pass in the night . His father , carrying a horn with embers inside that glowed like moonlight , rode ahead into the darkness and disappeared . Though he could n't see anything in the dark night , dreamed that he kept riding forward since his father would have a warm fire waiting for him.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > Before the credits we learn that the film is about the , which has five members . A quotation gives the flavour : " Revenge is a dish best served cold " . In monochrome , a gasping , blood - covered bride ( ) looks up from a chapel floor . A hand wipes her face using a handkerchief with the name in the corner , while a male voice explains that what he is about to do is not a sadistic act , but a masochistic one . Just before he shoots her in the head , the tells ( ) that the baby she carries is his . A gunshot is heard and the opening credits begin , backed by the song " . Chapter 1 : # 2 . . The drives up in a yellow and red pickup truck , outside a suburban home and strolls to the front door . As she rings , a flashback shows the crashing to the floor and looking up to see the face of one of her attackers , ( ) . As soon as the door is open , the 's fist crashes into 's face . A savage fight follows , first with fists , then with knives . The fight pauses when a school bus drives up outside and a little girl walks through the door . The antagonists hide their knives and pretend nothing is amiss despite the wreckage around them . They both reassure the child , ( ) . The mentions that she used to have a child who would be the same age as ( whom is four ) . sends the girl to her room . At this point is introduced as a member of the , codename . The is also a member , codename . The makes clear that she is here for revenge but promises not to kill in front of her child . They plan a fight later , but while is preparing cereal for her child she fires a concealed gun at the . She misses and the kills her with a thrown knife . The child walks in , a witness to her mother 's death . The apologises but explains that her mother had it coming to her . She tells that if , when she grows up , she ca n't get past the killing , she should come find the . " I 'll be waiting , " the promises . She returns to the pickup , which is emblazoned with the words " " , crosses 's name from a list titled " Five , " and drives away . Chapter 2 : The Blood years earlier in an wedding chapel , police are investigating a mass murder . The sheriff ( ) drives up and is told that there has been an execution - style massacre leaving nine bodies , including the bride , the groom , the preacher and his wife , the guests , and even the piano player . The sheriff strolls around commenting on the massacre , stops near the bride , and remarks on how good - looking she was . He immediately recognizes the name she was using , , as an alias . As he kneels to look more closely at her , she suddenly ( perhaps unintentionally ) spits in his face . We see her rushed to a hospital , where she lies in a deep coma . A smartly - dressed blonde woman walks through the hospital , whistling a tune . She finds a changing room and emerges dressed as a nurse with a red - cross patch over one eye and carrying a tray with a syringe . A title identifies her as ( ) of the , codename . She stands over the comatose and says that her gift is to allow her to die in her sleep . As she prepares to inject the contents of the syringe into the 's line , her mobile phone rings . It is , who orders her to abort the mission in view of the 's survival of their previous efforts to assassinate her , and because it would lower them . is furious , but does as ordered and leaves . Four years later , the is still lying in a coma . A mosquito bites her and she sits up with a shriek . In a flashback she sees a gun pointing at her and a bullet approaching in slow motion . She begins to feel her body , first noticing the metallic sound of her skull and then feeling the absence of the baby in her womb . She shrieks again and sobs pitifully . When she hears approaching footsteps , she lies back and pretends to be still in a coma . An orderly ( ) enters , accompanied by a large trucker ( ) . The orderly explains that , for $ 75 , this attractive woman is available for whatever the trucker wants . The man pays up and is told that he can do anything as long as he does n't leave any marks . The orderly leaves and the man climbs on top of the . As he starts to kiss her she bites down on his lower lip and severs it in a profusion of blood . He 's left unconscious or dead . The tries to get out of bed but collapses as her legs will not support her . When she hears the orderly returning she picks up a knife and crawls behind the door . He enters and stands aghast at the carnage and the empty bed . She slashes his heel and he falls to the floor . Then , slamming the door into his head , she demands to know where is . She reads the name on the orderly 's name tag , which triggers memories of his earlier assaults on her . She gives him a couple more violent blows with the door , perhaps killing him , then searches him for his car keys . The key fob says " " in distinctive pink script . Propelling herself to the basement car park in a wheelchair , the is able to identify 's yellow pickup because it says " " on the back . She hauls herself in and starts the long process of getting her legs moving again . A shot of the rest of the gang introduces O - Ren ( ) , , now head of the yakuza . Chapter 3 : The of O - Ren anime format , the film follows - 's development from the age of nine , when she witnessed the murder of her parents . Her father , an American military officer , had tried to fight off several yakuza henchman , but was killed . The yakuza leader , a sleazy old man , , also brutally murders - 's Japanese mother . The last of 's men lights a fire in the room , letting the house burn to the ground . O - Ren survives and avenges the murders at age 11 in blood - spouting style , taking advantage of 's pedophilia . She grows up to be a world - class assassin . Meanwhile 13 hours have passed and the has regained use of her legs , so she sets out on her revenge trail . We see her flying to . Chapter 4 : The Man from enters a Japanese sushi bar and there is a longish scene with the bar - keeper and some slapstick action with his assistant . Things get serious when she tells the bar - keeper that she is looking for him , ( ) . She explains that she needs some " Japanese steel " to kill vermin . He shows her to his attic where he keeps an array of the katanas ( swords ) he has made . When she tries one out he says that they are not for sale and he has sworn not to make any more " instruments of death " . She explains that her " vermin " is a former pupil of his and he correctly guesses that she means . He agrees to make her a sword , which will take a month . He suggests the spend that time training . A month later we see examining the new sword , which he believes is his finest work . He hands it to her in a small and solemn ceremony where he admits he broke his personal pact not to make any more swords but has done so because he supports the 's mission . Chapter 5 : at the of film returns to O - Ren and shows her as newly elected of the of all the yakuza bosses . When one objects to her election on the grounds of her mixed - race origin ( she is / - ) , she immediately beheads him and warns the others never to disparage her heritage in any way or they 'll suffer the same fate . We are introduced to - 's lieutenants : her French - Japanese lawyer ( ) , another of 's protges ; her teenage bodyguard ( ) , a vicious killer sporting a plaid - skirted school uniform ; and ( - , credited as ) , the head of her small army , the flies into and appears in yellow leathers and helmet riding a yellow motorbike while - and her motorcade are heading for a restaurant . The spots in her car and there is a flashback to calmly taking a call on her mobile while the and her party were being slaughtered . O - and her immediate subordinates arrive at the restaurant and are ushered upstairs to a private dining room by the obsequious owners . At the bar , the sits quietly and watches . O - and her party are enjoying themselves when O - senses something threatening . She throws a small dart with a red tassel through the paper wall to lodge in a beam in the hallway outside , startling the , who is lurking near the private room . O - sends to look around , but the has braced herself against the ceiling and does n't see her . The enters the toilet and while stripping off her leathers , hears " , " the distinctive ring - tone of 's mobile . With in tow , the loudly announces her presence from the restaurant floor , which brings O - Ren and her party rushing out onto the balcony . While they watch she slashes off one of 's arms and pandemonium ensues as the diners and staff flee . O - sends her lieutenants down singly or in groups to kill the , but all end up being cut apart . The final defender is , who opposes the 's sword with a ball and chain in a vicious fight , ending when the kills by embedding a broken , nail - studded table leg in her temple . Before O - and the can engage , the roar of motorbikes is heard and the 88 pour in . The ensuing battle of one against many is long , balletic and bloody but finally only one of the 88 remains -- the youngest -- and the sends him off with a spanking . She announces to the defeated 88 that they may leave , but they must leave behind their severed limbs , which belong to her now . She also orders to stay . Outside in the snow , the and O - Ren fight it out in a long and evenly - matched sword - fight . At the start of the fight , O - casts doubt on the provenance of the 's sword . The wins by slicing off the top of - 's head ; before she dies , O - apologizes for an earlier insult and remarks that the sword must really be a . Later , the assembles her revenge list with O - Ren at the top , whose name the crosses out . The loads into a car and drives to a point where she can roll her down a snowy slope to a hospital . The has tortured , cutting off her other arm for information on the whereabouts of the other and . As the draws up her " Five , " we see , talking to someone whose face is not seen but who is clearly . She tells that under threat of having more limbs cut off , she has told the everything she knows . She explains that the kept her alive just so she could tell in person all that happened and warn him that soon all of them would be dead . 's final words are " Is she aware that her daughter is still alive?"To be continued .... </synopsis > 

 < synopsis > Sheltering from a rainstorm in the ruins of the gatehouse , a woodcutter ( ) and a priest ( ) sit dejected . A commoner ( ) joins them , and wants to hear the " strange story " they have just heard at a murder enquiry in the courthouse garden . The story has horrified the priest . Even though " year after year , it 's been nothing but disasters , " he has " never heard a story as horrible as this . " The woodcutter is utterly confounded , and hopes the commoner can help him understand it . The woodcutter begins the narration , telling the commoner that three days earlier he had gone " into the mountains to get wood . "The woodcutter is walking through the woods , carrying his axe . Sunlight filters through the foliage , dappling everything with a mix of sun and sharp shadows . He sees a woman 's hat caught on a bush . Further along , he picks up a samurai 's hat and some cut up rope . He sees something small amongst the leaves on the ground , and goes towards it , but does not notice the corpse right in front of him until he trips over it . He screams and , dropping everything ( including his axe ) , runs away . He says , " I ran as fast as I could to tell the police . Then , three days later -- today -- I was called to testify . "The woodcutter is seated in the sunlit courthouse garden , addressing the court , unseen and unheard behind the camera . He testifies that he is the one who found the body . Asked if he saw " a sword or something , " he protests emphatically that he found " nothing at all " but the hats , rope , and " a shiny amulet case . " And here he lets slip two additional details : the rope was " near the body " and the amulet case had " a red lining . "The priest is seated in the courthouse garden . He testifies that he saw the man three days earlier , travelling on the road with a woman on a horse , and armed with a sword and bow and arrows . [ There is a brief shot of the samurai passing on the road , turning to smile at his wife . ] The priest comments on the fragility of life and offers condolences to someone off screen -- presumably the wife . The policeman ( ) is seated in the courthouse garden . The bandit ( ) is sitting beside him , bound . The policeman identifies the bandit as the notorious . He had captured him two days earlier , at dusk . [ There is a brief shot of the policeman finding the bandit writhing in agony on a riverbank . The bandit pushes him into the river . ] He describes the weapons and horse belonging to the samurai . He concludes that must have fallen from the stolen horse . The bandit hotly denies falling from his horse . [ There is a brief shot depicting the bandit as he wants to be perceived : galloping in heroic mode across the horizon , with stirring music . ] He explains to the court that he was thirsty , and drank from a spring . [ There is a brief shot of him drinking thirstily from a stream . ] He says it must have been contaminated , because he was ill and had to get off the horse . The bandit says he knows he is doomed , so he has no reason to hide anything . He says it was he who killed the samurai . [ There is a scene of the bandit lounging against a large tree , watching as the samurai ( ) and his wife ( ) pass by , the samurai eyeing the bandit warily . ] The bandit says he initially intended " to take her without killing the man . "Throughout the woodcutter 's narration of the bandit 's testimony the bandit 's bravado and dignity are undercut . He has animal - like mannerisms , and appears indolent and ignoble , constantly scratching and swatting flies . The bandit runs through the woods to catch up to the couple . He accosts the samurai , lures him into the woods with a tale of a cache of swords he will sell cheap , and jumps him from behind . He laughs in triumph , and goes to get the wife , tricking her by saying her husband has suddenly " taken sick . " In the courthouse garden the bandit says the wife 's look of concern made him jealous , and this made him want to humiliate the samurai . Running through the woods , led by the bandit , the wife loses her hat . When they reach the grove she sees her husband tied to a tree stump . The wife , at first frozen and powerless , suddenly draws a dagger and fiercely attacks the bandit . She struggles , but eventually gives up . The bandit kisses her . She drops the dagger and embraces him . In the court the bandit says that he " had succeeded in having her without killing her husband . " Having got what he wanted , it would make sense for the bandit to leave the scene while he can easily get away . In the grove , the bandit begins to leave , taking the samurai 's sword . But the woman makes a bizarre melodramatic request that the men duel to the death . In response , he frees the samurai and lets him have his sword back . There is a fierce , dramatic sword fight . The bandit finally kills the samurai . In the courthouse garden the bandit boasts that it was an honourable , impressive fight , claiming they " crossed swords 23 times . " When asked about the woman , he has to think a moment about this odd loose end , and supposes she ran off in ( contrary to the fierce spirit that had attracted him ) . Responding to further questions , the bandit says that he sold the samurai 's sword to buy liquor , and that he had forgotten the dagger -- a " foolish " mistake , as it " looked very valuable . "In the gatehouse the woodcutter says the bandit 's and the woman 's stories were lies . The commoner observes that this is human . " Most of the time we ca n't even be honest with ourselves . " The priest laments that this is because men are " weak . " The priest says the woman was found hiding in a temple , and that she appeared at the enquiry . He says she showed no fierceness , was " almost pitiful . "The priest takes over the narration , and begins relating the woman 's testimony . The woman is in the courthouse garden , prostrate and weeping . She says after forcing her to " yield to him " the bandit laughed mockingly . In the grove , the bandit takes the samurai 's sword and runs off . The woman embraces her bound husband , but he remains impassive . In the court , the woman says she saw " neither anger , nor sorrow , but a cold light , a look of loathing . " In the grove , she begs him to stop , but he continues to look at her with cold disdain . She collapses in despair , then retrieves the dagger , cuts his bonds , and tells him to kill her . When he does not respond , she pleads for him to stop condemning her with his silence , and repeats this over and over as she approaches him with the dagger clenched in her hand . In the courthouse garden she says that she must have fainted and that when she came to she saw her dagger in her dead husband 's chest . She says she remembers only a pond [ There is a brief shot of the surface of a pond . ] , and throwing herself in , and failing with several other attempts to kill herself . She dissolves in tears . In the gatehouse , the commoner comments that women " use their tears to fool everyone . " The priest mentions " the dead man 's story , " explaining that " he spoke through a medium . " The woodcutter says , " His story was also lies , " and he looks away from them , agitated . The priest refuses to believe a dead man would be so sinful as to lie , but the cynical commoner observes : " But is there anyone who 's really good ? Maybe goodness is just make - believe . . . just wants to forget the bad stuff and believe in the made - up good stuff . It 's easier that way . " He asks the priest to continue . In the courthouse garden , the medium ( ) performs a ritual around a small altar , and goes into a trance . When she speaks , it is the samurai 's voice that is heard . The medium / samurai tells a story that incorporates sentiments and actions that vilify the woman , and are out of character and illogical for the bandit , but that result in the bandit and the woman leaving separately , with the samurai free of his bonds . In this sequence there are frequent cuts between the grove and the courthouse garden . The medium / samurai says the bandit " tried to console his wife . " In the grove , the bandit is kneeling by the woman , who is lying on the ground . He " was cunning , " telling the woman that he loved her , and that she should marry him now . She gives in to him , and agrees to go with him " wherever . " But then she tells the bandit to kill her husband . The bandit is appalled , throws her to the ground , and asks the samurai what he wants : " Kill her or save her ? You only have to nod . " The medium / samurai laughs with triumphant satisfaction , and says : " For those words alone , I was ready to pardon his crime . "The woman runs away . The bandit chases her , but is unable to catch her . He returns , exhausted and frustrated . He cuts the samurai 's bindings , and leaves , taking both swords . The samurai weeps . He sees his wife 's dagger , and uses it to stab himself . In court , the medium collapses . In the background , the woodcutter 's attention is riveted . The medium / samurai says : " Then someone quietly approached me . That someone gently withdrew the dagger from my heart . " When the medium 's testimony stops there , the woodcutter relaxes . In the gatehouse , the woodcutter paces thoughtfully . He suddenly asserts : " Its not true ! There was no dagger . He was killed by a sword . " The commoner looks skeptical , and presses the woodcutter to explain how he knows this . The woodcutter avoids eye contact when he claims that he was a witness , but did not tell the court because he " did n't want to get involved . " He says he came upon the scene and , from behind a bush , observed the bandit begging the woman for forgiveness . The woodcutter tells a story that incorporates elements from the different stories heard in court . He describes actions that are out of character and implausible , and the demeanor of the characters fluctuates wildly . There is no music -- only the sounds of insects , rustling leaves , and gasping breath . In the grove , the bandit begs the woman to go with him , and says he will do anything for her . She retrieves the dagger , and cuts the samurai 's bonds . The samurai is still wearing his sword , but just stands there . The bandit assumes she wants them to fight a duel . The samurai refuses to risk his life " for such a woman . " The bandit starts to leave . The woman laughs derisively , and derides them both for their lack of manhood . This drives the men to fight . The woman laughs , but then looks horrified . The men fight with farcical ineptitude in something resembling an undignified peasant brawl . The bandit finally spears the cowering samurai . The woman recoils from the bandit . He grabs the samurai 's sword , and she runs away . He is too exhausted to chase her . He retrieves his own sword , and hobbles away . In the gatehouse , the cynical commoner doubts this story . The priest despairs that men can not trust one another . Then they hear an abandoned baby cry . When the woodcutter berates the commoner for stealing the baby 's , the commoner deflects the criticism by condemning the parents who abandoned their child . He says that no one is honest . He has n't been fooled by the woodcutter . He knows the woodcutter must have stolen the dagger . The woodcutter hangs his head in shame . The commoner slaps the woodcutter , and goes on his way , laughing mockingly . The priest and the woodcutter stand dejected . The rain stops . The woodcutter reaches to take the baby from the priest . The priest recoils , and the woodcutter shakes his head , looking very hurt . He explains : " I have six kids of my own . Another one would n't make a difference . " The priest recognizes that the woodcutter is basically a decent man , ashamed of his petty theft . He apologizes for his mistrust , and thanks him , because now he feels he can keep his faith in man . The priest hands the baby to the woodcutter . They bow to one another , and the woodcutter turns . The priest follows him to the steps of the gatehouse , and the two bow to each other again . The woodcutter leaves , walking into the sunlight . He is looking > 

 < synopsis > of The has exposed 's identity as - to the world , while simultaneously framing him as the individual responsible for 's death and an alleged mass casualty event in . Numerous civilians nearby begin to surround him and , forcing them to flee from the media and the police . They hide in 's apartment and reunite with and , who reveal that they have broken up . Not long after , the of take them along with in their custody for interrogation . hires to represent him , who manages to get his criminal charges dropped . However , as , , and Leeds return to for their senior year , the intense controversy causes them to be rejected from every college they apply to , including visits the and asks to make the identity of - a secret once more to get his friends into . Despite being warned by not to , Strange attempts to cast the spell with the of - . However , incessantly alters the spell when requesting various individuals close to him to be exempt from its effects . As a result , the spell becomes unstable , forcing to contain it . For not consulting with college administrators before meeting with him , Strange furiously kicks out of the . Contacting , who was admitted to , is led to an administrator heading to the in an attempt to appeal his , ' and Leeds ' applications . is suddenly ambushed by , who seems to know him personally . grabs him and rips out a piece of the , transferring its nanites onto his tentacles . He goes for another strike , but - reveals his face , which is unfamiliar to . - then takes control of ' tentacles with the suit 's nanites and rescues the from falling off the bridge , who decides to help get him and his friends admitted out of gratitude . arrives and attempts to attack - , but he and are transported into the , where Strange imprisons and . He informs that , , and are not of this universe , but from parallel realities within the , who were pulled into this reality by the failed spell since they know - 's identity . To contain this spell , Strange locks it in the , a mystical containment unit . is recruited to help find and capture these " visitors " , receiving a magic - based upgrade to his suit . With assistance from and , - locates outside the city . Startled , he attacks - and gains the upper hand , but intervenes to shield the hero . The two work together to cut the power lines , which fully restores 's body . When he is sent to the , believes - killed him , but is also captured before he can retaliate . Elsewhere , attempts to escape from his persona , breaking his mask before fleeing to a facility seeking refuge . Spider - locates thanks to and brings him to the as well . Osborn , , and soon realise that they died and were resurrected by the spell , meaning that if they were to return home then they would perish . Strange explains to - that these three are doomed to die fighting their own - . He intends to use the to reverse the spell and send them back to their fates for the sake of the greater Multiverse . Convinced that they can be cured of their antagonistic natures and be spared from death , - steals the before can use it and flees . Strange gives chase , takes - 's magic back , and sends him into the to retrieve the , while also trying to implore him of the Multiversal stakes relying on the visitors being sent back . Unfazed , - entangles Strange in a web matrix and steals his before returning to the Plane . He passes the ring to and the to before releasing the prisoners from confinement . Taking them to 's condominium , - attempts to administer cures for the Multiversal refugees . He starts with , using a to engineer a replacement inhibitor chip for his tentacles and restore his higher brain function . In addition , has an energy siphon installed into him which is designed to extract his powers . But before he could affect , the persona takes over his body , who persuades to remove the siphon before it can fully take away his abilities . He steals an and , drawing its power , blasts out of the building . , , and escape , while attacks - , sending him to the ground floor . Running outside , injects an antidote into , which does n't work . After striking with his , tosses two , which - fails to block and explodes in their proximity . Spider - manages to locate in the rubble . Unaware that she had been gravely injured , tells her nephew not to give up helping others despite all odds , lecturing him that with great power comes great responsibility . As officers surround them , - tries to save , to no avail , as she passes away in front of him . arrives on the scene and is immediately apprehended by authorities . - stricken , - flees , his guilt worsening with 's gaslighting coverage of the attack . Growing worrisome after - 's silence , prepares to activate the , but Leeds manages to open a portal with the by accident . Attempting to find - , they see what seems to be their - on the other side of the portal , calling him over . However , they soon realize that this - is not theirs , but rather one from another universe that previously fought the and . Leeds tries again , but summons yet another alternate , who previously fought , , and . The group finally manage to find their - alone on top of and attempt to console him about , but he is too distraught about his mistakes to even care . Before he can use the to send the travellers home , the other two begin sharing their own personal experiences of loss and bitterness to help him cope and realise that he is not alone . A cheered up - then decides to do what he planned to do : heal the villains . The , , and Leeds then retreat to a classroom laboratory in to create the cure for the villains . 's engineers an anti - serum for as 's recreates the antidote to return him back to normal , while - prepares the cures for and . Afterwards , brings them to the of via portal as he and remain in the lab . Spider - calls into The to broadcast a message , using the as a lure while announcing his presence to , , and . They arrive and attack the three Spider - on the scaffolding . The web - slingers are unable to coordinate effectively , which leads them to be easily overpowered by their enemies . Grouping up , - assumes command of the trio due to his experience as part of the ; the three adopt code - names : - as - , 's - as - , and 's - as - . They decide to engage and cure one enemy at a time , with first . After restraining , - retrieves 's cure and passes the device to - , who then delivers the cure to - , allowing to be neutralised . The three Spider - Men attempt to take the from , but he proves to be too much of a match for them due to his increased power from the energy source . Lizard breaks free and attacks and in the lab , forcing - to leave and fight him . With the help of and his , - One forces to break open a bottle containing the antidote which reverts him back to his human form , . Leeds accidentally summons Strange to the battlefield who , upon seeing Connors , realizes - 's pacifist plan is working . Strange grabs back the and his from . - and - are overpowered by , until arrives to extract the himself and render him powerless with the finished neutralizer . - reconciles with while - warmly reunites with . - One returns to as he prepares to use the to send everyone home . Suddenly , ambushes the group and takes the , but and grab it back . Unbeknownst to them , had snuck a inside the object . It detonates and releases the unstable contained spell , tearing the fabric of the universe and opens it up to the . The blast also causes to fall from the of . - dives to rescue her , but is knocked aside by - - saves her , and begins to tear up as it reminded him of the night died . As dawn breaks , - One confronts alone . Ravaged with vengeance , he viciously beats him down and attempts to finish him off with his glider , but is stopped by - Two . This however leaves him open to get stabbed in the back by . - provides - with the anti - serum , allowing him to cure from . He notices - 's injury , which is non - fatal , and realizes the extent of the damage he had caused . Strange struggles to hold the rifts in the universe together , in which intruders are already preparing to invade this reality . However , - has him enact a new spell to make everyone forget who he is to fix it . Afterwards , - embraces his alternate selves , who encourage him to continue on as - . Strange repairs the rifts with the new spell and successfully transports - , - , , , , and Connors back to their origin universes . Spider - embraces and for a final time , while promising to return someday and help them remember him . He then departs as unleashes the spell , leaving the entire world completely oblivious to 's existence . A few weeks later , it is now the holidays . tries to reconnect with his - bound friends , but after being reminded of ' wounds , he decides not to . He visits 's grave to pay his respects and is joined by , who is also now a stranger to him . Contending to carry on with his new life , moves into a new apartment alone and begins studying to earn his . Alerted to criminal activity on his phone , he stitches together a simpler suit and resumes his heroics undisturbed as - , honoring 's mantra of community service and responsibility . In a mid - credits scene : the universe - displaced and his symbiote companion sit at a bar and talk with the bartender about other super - humans and the . While pondering how to " protect " this new world , the duo is swiftly transported back to their universe by 's spell , unknowingly leaving a part of the symbiote on the counter.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > In the opening shot , an alien spaceship flies through space and enters 's atmosphere near . Whether or not the ship crashes or lands on is unknown . In , during the winter of 1982 , a helicopter flies hurriedly after a husky . The man riding next to the pilot shoots a rifle and drops grenades hoping to kill the dog . The dog runs toward an American research base , 31 , where a 12 - man research crew is getting ready for the upcoming winter . The helicopter , which they see is from a Norwegian research base , flies in and lands . The watch puzzled as two men emerge from the helicopter jabbering frantically in their native language . One of them pulls the pin on a grenade but clumsily throws it behind him . As the pilot frantically tries to find it in the snow , it explodes , killing him and taking the helicopter with it . The other man continues shooting his rifle hysterically and talking frantically ; no one can understand what he is saying and the man shoots ( ) in his left leg . The camp leader ( ) shoots and kills the gibbering man in defense . Puzzled about why the were trying to kill the dog , ( ) the team 's helicopter pilot and their doctor , ( ) go to investigate the Norwegian base . The whole base has been gutted by fire and explosions as there are holes in several of the walls in the interior of the complex . There is also a fire ax stuck into one of the walls . Everyone is dead ; one of them had barricaded himself in the radio room and is still sitting frozen in his chair , his wrists and throat slit in an apparent suicide . and explore further , finding a large and empty block of ice . Outside in the snow , along with one or two burned human bodies , and find the burnt and frozen corpse of a twisted creature , not man but not beast , either . They bring it back to their own base for examination . An autopsy performed by biologist reveals nothing more than a normal set of internal organs despite a deformed , distorted exterior . That night , the new stray husky is locked in a kennel with the team 's sled dogs . The other dogs soon react with fear to the new addition , growling and snarling . The new dog suddenly transforms into a hideous creature with tentacles and crab 's legs and starts attacking the other dogs . The incident is discovered by dog handler ( ) , who watches horrified . hears the sounds of the thing 's unworldly groan and the cries of the other dogs ; and he immediately responds by sounding the fire alarm , waking up the entire camp who converge on the kennel where they see the hideous dog - like creature seemingly consuming the other sled dogs . Part of the creature separates from the rest and pulls itself up through the ceiling . After shooting at the beast with their guns , the ' thing ' is burned with a flamethrower . An autopsy done by on the thing 's remains reveals its secret : the " thing " is an alien organism that imitates other life forms by attacking , and either digesting or dissolving them and reshaping its image to appear in the animal or person it kills . The team also watches a videotape of the Norwegian team working at a remote location , forming a circle around an object in the ice and using charges to uncover it . The following day , flies with and to the site where the were working . They find an alien spaceship in the open crater and rappel down to look around . asks how long the ship has been entombed ; estimates that it 's been there for at least 100,000 years . Up above the crash site , they find a block of the ice cap missing where the thing was discovered and removed by the . Back at 31 , theorizes that the awakened the creature after thawing its ice block and it immediately began to attack them . That evening , studies cells from the , and watches them attack and replicate other kinds of cells on his computer . Typing his report into his computer , the computer replies that the possibility that one or more team members may be infected by the alien organism is 75 % , and that if the alien reached civilization , the 's population will be infected and taken over by the alien organism 27,000 hours ( around 37 months , just over 3 years ) after first contact . The team decides to place the creature 's remains in a storage room . The assistant biologist ( ) asks to speak privately with ; he tells that he 's been looking through 's ( ) notes and found that believes the organism 's cells are still alive and active in the burned remains of both creatures . has also theorized that the alien might have imitated a thousand other lifeforms across space . While ( ) and Bennings prepare the room to store the remains recovered from the Norwegian base , it begins to move under the blanket it 's been covered with . Windows returns to the room to find being attacked , wrapped in tentacles . gets the other team members but has escaped through the storage room window . They find him in the snow , his transformation by the alien nearly complete except for his hands , which are hideously large and grotesque shapes . and the team incinerate him alive and then burn the remains of the two other creatures along with him . Realizing that something like this could take over the world if it got out , seemingly loses his mind , killing the surviving sled dogs and destroying the helicopter and the communications equipment ( injuring in the process ) , trapping the crew without hope of rescue . The others , seeing him as a threat , subdue him , lock him in the camp 's tool shed and sedate him . The next morning , fear and paranoia circulates around the camp as nobody knows who may be the thing or who is n't . suggests that he develop a blood serum test to see who might be infected . Copper finds that the blood bags in the lab have been slashed open , making their contents useless . Copper believes that someone deliberately destroyed the blood to prevent the test from happening . and become suspects because of their access to the blood storage while is regarded with suspicion because of his proximity to the imitation dog . All three are quarantined by who takes over as the ' de facto ' leader of the team to find out who may be the Thing . When a ' whiteout ' storm ( an Antarctic storm resembling a winter hurricane ) hits the camp and the outside temperature drops severely , they are forced to hunker down , all of them continuing to be paranoid and distrustful of one another . Mac talks to , who only has a few weak theories from 's notes . recommends that everyone prepares their own meals and eat only out of cans . The following evening , , trying to do research on how the Thing can reproduce and multiply , is waylaid when one of the unseen infected persons disables the power to the lab . In going after it , is killed ( off - camera ) and his charred body is found outside in the snow a few hours later by , and . Either the Thing burned to death , or burned himself in a suicide to prevent him from being taken over . tells to return to the main building while he goes with to his shack to investigate : when he left two days before , he 'd turned out the lights and they 're back on . Some time later , Nauls returns to the camp , nearly collapsing because of the cold . He tells the others he 'd found ragged and dirty clothing with 's name on it in the oil furnace inside 's shack . As they were struggling back to the main compound , cut 's safety line and made a break for it . is locked outside and breaks the window in a storeroom to enter . He arms himself with a small bundle of dynamite and threatens to blow himself and the rest of them up if they do n't back away . When ( ) and the others rebel against ( and to express their suspicion that he may be the Thing ) , collapses when he appears to have a heart attack . When tries to revive him using defibrillator paddles , ' chest suddenly opens up into a monstrous mouth and bites off 's arms . uses a flamethrower to destroy the / , leaving only it 's head , which detaches , sprouts spider - like legs and tries to crawl away before it is destroyed as well . At this point , leads the others in a test to determine who is infected . He suggests that everyone give a blood sample , and then those blood samples be poked with a hot piece of wire . The theory is that each part of a Thing will try to survive independently , and therefore the blood would transform to defend itself . makes an attempt on 's life with a scalpel ; he is shot and killed by . Everyone is tied up ( including the dead and ) while the test is performed . is the first to be tested , and turns out to be human ; arms him with another flamethrower to torch anyone who might be a Thing . As continues the test ( testing the dead bodies of and , whom are not infected ) , he openly accuses of being a duplicate , but instead finds that ( ) is a Thing clone . As transforms , 's flamethrower misfires and hesitates to kill the - . The - 's entire head splits open and turns into a giant mouth , biting ' head . manages to get his flamethrower working and sets the - Thing on fire which crashes through the wall to die in the snow , which then blows up with a stick of dynamite . is then forced to torch with the other flame thrower , since he is now infected and the Thing is assimilating his body . and the three remaining survivors , , , and ( ) are revealed to be not infected . While ordering to stay behind to watch the camp , , and go to check on to give him the blood test , and discover the shed empty ; had escaped through the floor and was secretly building a small spacecraft in the tunnels under the camp . They are confused when they see 's running off into the storm , but at that moment , the compound 's power suddenly turns off . It is then they realize that is the last Thing creature and that it wants to freeze into hibernation until the rescue team finds it since it has no way out . Finally , realizing how pervasive the infection is and that there is little chance for survival , it is proposed that they blow up the base to prevent the Thing from freezing again . , and begin setting fire to the complex with cocktails . In venturing down into the basement of the camp to set charges , is killed by the infected . disappears and is never seen again . comes face - to - face with the huge , tentacle / , which destroys his detonator . In a last - ditch effort , throws a lighted stick of dynamite at it . Both the Thing and the rest of the compound explode , but survives . He stumbles to his ruined shack to find there , who claims he had seen and had gotten lost in the storm running after him . Neither of them know whether the other is the , and they both sit ready opposite and facing each other , ready to kill the other at the first sign . ( is definitely not the Thing , but there is a strong possibility that might have been taken over when he wandered off earlier ) . They take swigs from a bottle of whiskey as the camera shows a wide shot of the camp in flames . Both men , exhausted and wary of each other , sit among the burning wreckage .... waiting for the fires to go out and the winter weather to consume them . On that dark note , along with a wiry laugh from , ' The Thing ' comes to a close.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > Two clownfish , ( ) and his wife ( ) , admire the view from their new home within a sea anemone overlooking the drop off of a coral reef . Below them , their clutch of eggs lies hidden in a small hole . Excited to be first - time parents , they discuss names , expressing her fondness for " . " They flirt playfully with each other until 's attention is distracted by the appearance of a barracuda . Ignoring 's order to hide , Coral moves to protect her eggs and the barracuda lunges . rushes in but the barracuda knocks him out with a flick of its tail , sending him back into the anemone . When he comes to that night , he discovers that and the eggs are gone but manages to find a single surviving egg with a scratch on its right side . Vowing to protect it , he names the codling . raises ( ) in a secure anemone further into the reef . On the morning of his first day of school , an excited his father , flapping his tiny right fin wildly . helps him prepare for the day , showing to be overprotective and doubtful of 's ability to take care of himself . escorts to school -- along the way , asks how old sea turtles live to be ; does n't have an answer . ( ) , the local teacher , takes the children on a field trip . When learns that they are going to the drop off , he swims after them in a panic . Upon arrival follows three of his peers ( , , and Per ) , bored with 's lesson , to the very edge of the reef where they see a boat ( misnaming it a " butt " ) anchored in the distance . They dare each other to swim out into open water to touch the " butt " as arrives and yells at for endangering himself . While talking to , fails to notice swimming fiercely out to sea , stopping beneath the boat . In an act of defiance , touches the boat with his fin and starts to swim back before a diver suddenly appears behind him and traps him in a small bag . is prevented from swimming out after his son by another diver who takes a picture , disorienting him . Regaining his sight , swims after the divers as the boat departs the reef . The diver places in a cooler full of water and accidentally drops his mask into the water . swims after the boat but eventually loses the trail . He swims to the sea floor , begging passing schools of fish for help until he bumps into a regal tang named ( ) . She claims to have seen the boat and leads a thankful in the direction it went but , as they swim along , she becomes lax and even tries to evade when she notices him behind her . When she confronts him , he questions her and she apologizes , telling she has short - term memory loss . Dumbfounded , turns to leave but is stopped by a great white shark who introduces himself as ( ) . He invites and to a get - together he 's having and , despite 's objections , escorts them to his lair in a sunken submarine surrounded by live sea mines . They meet 's fellow sharks , ( ) and ( ) , before beginning an assembly where they pledge to abstain from eating fish . The two are fairly terrified by the sharks until spots the diver 's mask stuck on a shard of metal . Inspecting it , he discovers markings on the strap that might provide a clue to 's whereabouts . Dory picks up the mask to see if the sharks can read but tries to take it back , engaging in a tug - of - war before the mask snaps into 's face , causing a nosebleed . The smell of the blood excites 's inner carnivore and , though and try to stage an intervention by holding him back , he mindlessly chases and through the submarine , taking hold of the mask in his mouth in the process . During this time , reveals that she can read human words before she and take refuge in a torpedo well . Dory releases the torpedo which wedges in 's mouth , giving enough time to grab the mask and flee back into the well . throws the torpedo away and and are able to regain his attention in time before the torpedo sets off one of the mines , causing a violent chain reaction of explosions of the entire minefield . Meanwhile , is placed into a new container revealed to be a fish tank in a dentist 's office . There he meets a few of the original inhabitants including the puffer fish ( ) , the yellow ( ) , the star ( ) , the ( ) , the - accented cleaner shrimp ( ) , and ( ) , a black - tailed humbug who believes her reflection to be her twin sister , . A pelican named ( ) perches himself on the window near the tank and greets after briefly discussing dental procedures with the other fish . He 's shooed away by the dentist ( ) who shows a picture of his niece , , whom has been promised to . The other fish cringe and call her a fish killer ( ' she would n't stop shaking the bag ' ) . Afraid and wanting to go home , backs away and gets stuck in the suction tube of the filter . The other fish go to help him but ( ) , a wise moorish idol with large scars on his right side , tells that he must escape himself , giving instructions and encouragement . manages to free himself and relates his strength to his ocean origins , like . and awake in the aftermath of the explosions to find the submarine hanging precariously over the edge of a deep ravine . Their movements cause the submarine to suddenly tip forward and collide with the rock wall of the far side . During the chaos and blinded temporarily by the dust , accidentally drops the mask into the darkness below . gives it up for lost but cheerfully takes him into the depths , telling him to just keep swimming . After a moment , they come upon a mysterious and alluring light which , unfortunately , belongs to a hungry anglerfish . During the chase , finds the mask and distracts the anglerfish long enough so that can read the address written on it . then leads the anglerfish towards the mask and traps it using the masks strap as a tether . Dory recites the address ' 42 , ' and is ecstatic to find that she can remember it . Back in the fish tank , is woken by who takes him to the tank 's toy volcano ( ) where the other fish perform an initiation to include in their club , giving him the nickname " . " then proposes a plan to escape the fish tank by jamming the gear in the filter which would cause the tank to become so dirty that the dentist will have to manually clean it and place the fish in baggies on the counter , allowing them to roll out the window to the street , cross it , and land in the harbor . Though the other fish are skeptical , asserts that is small enough to fit into the filter and make it back through the tubing . agrees to do it . and continue their journey and request directions to from a school of moonfish ( ) . They tell and to take the ( ) , after an impressive display of their synchronized impressions . When they come to a rocky trench . resolves to swim over it to avoid the ominous enclosure . With the in view , becomes distracted and is stung by a tiny jellyfish . As tends to her , they are suddenly surrounded by a school of larger jellyfish . Finding that the tops do n't sting , and bounce on them as they race out of the school . makes it out first and , when does n't appear , goes back in to retrieve her . He finds her unconscious and scarred from the stinging and struggles to carry her out as he is repeatedly stung . He makes it but , stung and exhausted , blacks out as a large shadow descends on him . Nemo waits in the fish tank with who is keeping an eye on the dentist for an opportune moment to jam the filter . looking at his scars , explains that during his first escape attempt he landed on dental tools , though he was aiming for the toilet . He says that all drains lead to the ocean and that fish were n't meant to live in a tank . cries out that the dentist is going for a bathroom break which cues to leap into the filter . tosses him a pebble and gives instructions as wedges the fan , stopping the flow of water . However , as he is moving through the pipe back into the tank , the pebble unhinges and the fan turns on again , sucking backwards . The other fish hurry and send a toy kelp to grab onto and pull him out . , asks not to send in the filter again . Sullen and realizing his plan put in grave danger , says they 're done . Meanwhile , wakes up to find himself resting on the shell of a laid - back sea turtle with a surfer 's attitude who introduces himself as ( ) . Incredulous , he discovers that he 's also riding along the with dozens of other sea turtles and large fish . is reunited with who sports a scar on her side from the jellyfish stings and meets 's son , ( ) . also meets 's spirited son , . While playing with the other sea turtles , is accidentally propelled outside the current . is panicky at first however convinces him that can handle himself . is able to swim his way back into the current & joins his father . sees that even the youngest among the turtles can learn to survive in the ocean . Having been told some details of their journey and the encounter with the jellyfish , and the other hatchlings ask to tell them the rest of the story . Hesitant at first , relents and begins with when was abducted . His story is not ignored ; it 's passed on from turtle to fish to dolphin to bird and onward until it reaches the pelican . Hearing 's name , he flies off to the dentist 's office . There , tries to apologize to for the botched escape attempt but says that his eagerness to escape almost cost his life and that nothing should be worth that . arrives , crashing into the closed window , but recovers and is able to tell the story of 's journey as it was told to him . When suggests that 's father took on three sharks and a school of , is newly impressed with his father . Invigorated , takes it upon himself to try the filter attempt again and , this time , succeeds . and continue along the until they come to their exit point where and show them where to depart the main line . After a confusing instructional speech on " proper exiting technique " Squirt pushes them into the exit flume and back into open water . Thanking , asks the turtle how old he is ; Crush answers that 's he 's " 150 years old & still young ! " They are instructed to continue through a large purplish plume of to . However , they soon become lost and Dory resolves to ask a distant fish for directions . Though is afraid at first , he decides to trust and she calls out to the distant figure . When she sees its a minke whale , she starts speaking ' whale ' , asking for help . grows frustrated with her again just as a whale approaches from behind and pulls them into its mouth . Back in the fish tank , a couple of days ' worth without a filter has rendered every surface covered in algae . When the dentist sees this , he opts to clean the tank the following morning before 's arrival . looks out the window to the harbor outside , wondering if his father is there already , waiting for him . In the whale 's mouth , and remain safe with enough water to swim in . Though is complacent , futilely attempts to break out by ramming into the whale 's baleen . He yells at for claiming to have spoken whale , calling her insane and lamenting over the fact that he 'll never see his son again . Dory tries to console him as the whale emits a call and the water in the mouth begins to drain . The whale then lifts his tongue to push and to the back of its throat but refuses to let go until assures him that , though she does n't know what will happen , everything will be all right . closes his eyes and releases his grip on the whale 's tongue . They fall to the back of the throat where they are then shot out of the whale 's blowhole , landing in . Overjoyed to have finally arrived , sends his thanks to the whale and encourages to help him find the boat that took . The following morning , wakes up with the horrified realization that the tank is suddenly clean . The fish find that the dentist had installed a new high - tech filter the night before and , though they are impressed with the fluid functionality of the device , they worry about what they will do when arrives . The dentist suddenly pulls up in a fish net but and the other fish swim into it and instruct to swim down , pulling the net into the tank and away from the dentist 's grip . Despite their efforts , is quickly scooped up in a plastic bag and set on the counter . The other fish tell to roll out the window but , before he can get far , the dentist places the baggie in a tin to keep him from moving . tries to assure that he 'll be OK but , at that moment , ( ) crashes into the office . and continue to search the harbor , both tired from looking at boats all night , when they are scooped up in the beak of a pelican . The pelican lands on a nearby dock and swallows them but refuses to have come this far just to be breakfast . He lodges himself and in the pelican 's neck , causing it to start choking . Nearby , wakes from a nap to notice the , , choking and flies down to assist . He hits in the back , expelling and from his mouth onto the dock where shouts out that he needs to find . Recognizing the name , turns to excitedly and tells him this is the fish that they 've been hearing about . When he turns back to , he sees that he and have flopped their way towards the end of the dock . chases after them but they are all forced to freeze when they notice that they are surrounded by hungry seagulls . When tells that he knows his son , , flips in excitement , causing the seagulls to rush forward , but manages to take and in his mouth and fly off . torments the fish in the tank before going in to see her uncle . As he picks up the baggie with inside , he notices floating upside down . The other fish quickly realize that is feigning death so that he can be flushed down the toilet but the dentist moves towards the trash can just as arrives in the window . forces into the office and the dentist drops the baggie . sees floating and believes him to be dead as the dentist grabs and forces him out the window again , calling out to . Hearing his name , pops upright but takes the bag and starts shaking it , trying to ' wake up the fishy ' . Gill lodges himself into the top of and the force of the bubbles propels him out of the tank . He lands on 's head and she drops 's bag on a table full of tools , breaking the plastic . falls off 's head next to and flips him into the sink and down the drain using a magnifying scope as a catapult . The dentist quickly puts back into the tank where he can breathe . tells the others not to worry about ; that all drains lead to the ocean . is upset and receives a squirt of water in her face from the sink . travels down the piping until he reaches a water treatment filtration , a series of piping that travels on the sea floor out of the harbor . flies out of the harbor with and and releases them into the water , offering his condolences . , thanks for helping him and begins to swim away . She asks him to stay with her and that her memory is better when he 's around , that she does n't want to forget . refuses and swims away , leaving her alone . emerges from the piping and calls out for his father . He finds swimming confusedly under a buoy , saying that she 's lost someone but ca n't remember . offers to search with her and Dory happily complies , though she does n't recognize him . As they swim together , comes upon a piece of piping and reads ' ' on it . Suddenly , all of her memories come flooding back to her and she rushes at , hugging him fiercely , before leading him in the direction went . They find out that headed towards fishing grounds and reunite with him amongst a large school of fish . The school of fish then cries out in panic as a large net from a fishing boat above envelopes them . Dory is caught up in the netting and says that he must swim in and instruct the fish to swim down . Though fears for 's safety , he lets go and allows to do what he can . instructs the panicked fish from outside the net and they all soon start swimming in synch downwards , pulling the net with them until it finally snaps away from the boat , freeing all the fish . and find under the heavy netting -- is stricken with grief , believing is dead . regains consciousness & gently tells him that he found out that sea turtles live to be 150 years old . and come to an understanding and all three go back to their home in the reef . 's demeanor has changed for the better and he is more upbeat and confident in his son 's abilities . He takes him to school where is dropped off by , , and who have included in their vegetarian program . hugs his father before heading off on another field trip with . watches them leave , knowing that his son will be all right . Back at the dental office in , the dentist curses the high - tech filter which has suddenly stopped working . He complains about having to put all the fish in baggies but notices that they have mysteriously disappeared from the counter . Horns honk out the open window as is the last to cross the street and land herself in the harbor with the other fish . As they float in their baggies , unable to escape confinement , wonders ' Now a post - credits stinger , the tiny fish that was 's " friend " at the support group is stalked by the anglerfish . As the anglerfish moves in to swallow him , the tiny fish suddenly opens his mouth to a surprisingly enormous size and swallows the angler.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > In 19th , ( ) wanders through an urban carnival in search of freak shows . He happens on a hideously deformed creature called The ( ) , and pays the owner ( ) to examine it . Treves purpose is to present a paper to the and enhance his medical reputation . The returns from the seminar to and is beaten severely for wondering off . The man 's injuries , as well as an attack from bronchitis , leads to admit him to the hospital . In an attempt to convince the authorities to allow the man to stay , Treves endeavors to communicate with the person . During a meeting , discovers that the man can talk and is educated . The 's name is and he reveals that he has had this strange disease since he was 14 which benign tumors grow all over his body , face and hands , in which he must sleep sitting up or he will die from suffocation . is given a room to live in and gradually becomes accepted by most members of the hospital staff . But one hospital night porter ( ) sees a money spinner and each evening gathers a drunken crowd of people who will pay any price to see the freak . Treves attempts to introduce to society and brings him over to meet with his wife ( ) , who hides her shock at Merricks appearance . Soon the local newspapers run articles on . One is read by actress ( ) who visits , tells him about her life in the theater and gives him a copy of plays . However the night porter is still in business in displaying . One evening , joins the and after a particularly humiliating brawl , and takes him to . Severely neglected and very ill , is once more put on display as the for the local crowds . Bytes ' son ( ) tells his father that he can take no more of seeing him humiliate a human being , but tells his son to mind his own business . That night , ' son , with the help of other carnival freaks , releases and assists his escape back to . Reunited with Treves , it appears that does not have long to live . visits the theater with and his wife where has her performance dedicated to him . Back at the hospital , thanks for a splendid evening and afterwards discards all pillows from his bed , determined to lie down like everyone else . lies down and sleeps one final time before quietly passing away , where his late mother welcomes him to the bright glory of Heaven.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > Set in 1937 , a private investigator named " " ( ) is hired to spy on , the chief engineer for the city 's water department . The woman hiring claims to be , ' wife . For unknown reasons , spends considerable time looking at dry riverbeds and water outlets . is photographed while having a heated argument with an elderly man on the street . Gittes photographs from a roof top when he kisses a young blonde , and the photo is published in the newspaper the next day , causing a scandal . After the story is published , is visited by the real , who threatens to sue him for defamation . Gittes uncovers information that despite a serious drought and an expensive proposal to build a new dam , the and is dumping fresh water into the ocean at night . The dam project is opposed by himself , who cites a potential disaster because of weak geological formations in the rock where the dam is to be constructed -- had previously supported the building of another dam that had failed due to similar geological conditions . When he addresses a public hearing on the project , which Gittes attends , is ridiculed by several farmers , one of whom leads a flock of sheep into the room , who want the reservoir and water the dam will provide . Gittes also meets with 's successor , , who tells that the of has been diverting some of the water supply to farmers in the because of the drought . He says specifically that there 's always some run - off into various smaller waterways and drain channels . goes to 's mansion to speak to him but is only able to talk to . While he waits for her , 's Japanese gardener cleans a small decorative pond , pulling out a clump of grass and tossing it aside . He casually says " bad for the glass " in broken , a comment that dismisses . notices a shiny object in the pool and tries to retrieve it , stopping when appears . She tells him that usually takes afternoon walks at a reservoir and that he should look for him there . Gittes goes to find at the reservoir -- bluffing his way past the checkpoint with one of 's business cards -- but instead finds the police and firemen hauling 's body out of the reservoir . They believe died from drowning . Gittes used to work with the lead investigator , . When the police interview about her husband 's death , they assume she hired , and corroborates the lie for her . She thanks him and hires him to investigate what happened to her husband . Later , at the county coroner 's department , learns from the coroner that 's lungs were filled with salt water , although he had been found in a freshwater reservoir . Gittes also learns that a local drunk was found dead from drowning in a dry riverbed that had been inspecting . Later that night climbs the secure fence around the reservoir and , after he is shot at by an unseen shooter , is nearly drowned when the culvert he is hiding in has a sudden rush of fast - moving water . Two water department security thugs detain him ; a large man named and a short thug ( a cameo by ) , who slashes 's nose for being a " very nosy . " They threaten to cut off the rest of his nose if he comes snooping around again . Gittes , forced to wear a large and ridiculous bandage , receives a call from , the woman who originally impersonated . She admits she was hired to trick Gittes , but refuses to come to his office . She tells him to read that day 's obituaries , saying he 'll find " one of those people " . At the water department , sees photographs of the elderly man quarreled with a few days before his death ; the man is ( ) , 's father . He used to own the water utility in partnership with , but ended his association with the department when the partners sold it to the city , as had long desired . He speaks briefly with again and tells him that he suspects was murdered . is incredulous and tells him he does n't want to see accused or charged with the crime but wants to nail the people behind it . invites to lunch at his home and hires to find the blond girl had been seeing , saying that she might know what happened to him and that he 'd like to comfort her if he can . Cross hints that might be sleeping with in addition to gouging her in his investigation of 's murder but relents when he sees 's resolve . Gittes goes to the of and looks in a large plat book of the valley . He learns that a considerable portion of the valley has been bought up in the past few months by a few new land owners who have purchased large tracts of land . When the attendant in the room refuses to let borrow the book , surreptitiously tears the column out of the book and pockets it . Acting on another tip from , begins to unravel an intricate scandal involving 's fresh water supply . Gittes first travels to an orange farm to talk with the owner about how his land is being irrigated . As he drives around he is shot at by the farmer and a few of his farmhands and crashes his car into a tree . is dragged from his car , beaten and searched . The farmer explains that the of & has been harassing him by sending agents to run him off his land and poison the water in his wells , suspecting that might be one of them . While he tries to show the farmer documentation of his investigation , the farmhands claim that is responsible for harassment of late and attack . When tries to fight back , he 's knocked unconscious . He wakes up to find that the farmer and his wife have called , who has come to the farm . While they drive back to , explains the scandal to her : her father and his partners have been forcing farmers in the rural areas surrounding the city off their land so they can buy it cheap , after which a newly - built ( and controversial ) dam and water system would start redirecting much of 's water supply to that land , dramatically increasing its real estate potential and value . Since wants no record of such transactions , he has partnered with a retirement home community , using the identities of the eldest residents within ( one of whom is mentioned in the obituary column ): they would legally , but unknowingly , own the land . , having matched one of the obituary names to one of the names in the list he stole from the plat book , has drive him to the retirement home where they pose as a married couple trying to find a place for 's father to live . The host tells them they can tour the facility . They come across an activities board with the names of the people from the plat book . Jake talks to a group of women working on a quilt . One of the pieces of fabric they 've sewn into the quilt is a small flag bearing the emblem of the , the yacht club owned by . is confronted by the host who has figured out 's ruse . The man takes him out to the lobby where is waiting . tells to bring the car around and then severely beats and barely escapes when the short thug who slashed his nose shows up . Back at 's house , and share a romantic interlude . As they lie on the bed afterward , asks about his past as a cop . He tells her he worked in and was responsible for a woman " being hurt " , possibly killed because of his actions . The phone rings and has a cryptic conversation with someone , then informs that she has to leave for a little while . She gravely asks him to trust her and wait for her to return . Gittes takes 's car and follows to a middle - class house and sees 's girlfriend crying . He confronts as she leaves , who claims the young woman is her sister , who was distraught because she had just learned about 's death in the newspaper . Later that night , receives a call at home from a detective named , 's partner , telling him to meet him at a specific address . When he gets there he finds that is murdered and and are waiting for him . When asks how they knew to call him shows his phone number written near the phone . also points out that he knows the coroner 's report proves that salt water was found in 's lungs even though the body was found in a freshwater , a fact that had discovered earlier but withheld . He demands that turn over any incriminating photos that may reveal 's murderer 's identity . 's chief suspect is herself . Under pressure from threatening to revoke his 's license , returns to 's mansion looking for her . 's Japanese gardener is working in the backyard and drops a minor comment about " salt water being bad for the * grass * " . The man 's accent had masked over the actual word he was using to describe the problem when he 'd said " bad for the glass . " has the man fish out the shiny object he 'd noticed in the pool before : it 's a pair of eyeglasses . Gittes confronts at the small house where she 'd been keeping the young girl . reveals that the blond girl , , is both her sister and her daughter , born from an incestuous relationship she had with her father years before . Gittes asks if her father raped her and she shakes her head no . It remains unclear whether the act was consensual or not . It is apparent also that resents her father for taking advantage of her in a relationship considered unnatural . Gittes then chooses to help escape . also states that the eyeglasses found in her back yard pond could not have been her husband 's because they are bifocals . Gittes arranges for the two women to flee to on a fishing boat owned by another of 's clients and instructs to meet him at her butler 's address in . leaves , and arrives with under the pretext that Gittes has found the girl ; however , confronts Cross with the accusation of murder and the glasses . had drowned in the saltwater pond at his own house and lost his own glasses in the pond during the act . asks about the water scandal ; blithely tells him that he plans to create a community in the desert with an abundant fresh water supply . The real estate revenues from the sales of the land will generate many millions of dollars for him . considers the plan a way of buying the future , essentially insuring that his family will reap the benefits from such a deal for many years . When pointedly asks about the relationship with his daughter , confidently says " Most people never have to face the fact that , at the right time and the right place , they 're capable of anything " . Cross then orders to seize the glasses , the only physical evidence has and forces to take him to 's butler 's address in . When Gittes arrives at 's hiding place in , the police are already there and arrest Gittes on conspiracy and withholding evidence . vainly tries to explain ' plan to , who wo n't listen . appears with her daughter , trying to drive away in her car . When approaches , demanding custody of her , pushes him back , shoots him in the arm with a small pistol and starts her car . As is driving away , the police open fire and is shot and killed . clutches the hysterical , taking her out of the car , as a devastated is comforted by his associates , who urge him to walk away : " Forget it , . It 's . "The plot is based in part on real events that formed the , in which acted on behalf of interests to secure water rights in the > 

 < synopsis > The film opens in 1964 , where an older and fatter ( ) practices his stand - up comic routine before his debut at a comedy nightclub . A flashback shifts to his boxing career in 1941 against his opponent , , in the infamous bout . Losing the fight by a fixed result causes a fight to break out at the end of the match in which audience members are trampled underfoot . 's brother ( ) is not only a sparring partner to him but also responsible for organizing his fights . A few days later , discusses a potential shot for the title with one of his mob connections , ( ) , while on the way to his brother 's run - down apartment in their neighborhood in the , where is in the middle of a screaming match with his wife . Once mollifies his enraged brother , the mercurial laments that his small , girlish hands limit his ability to rise to the top . Suddenly hostile , provokes into hitting him in the face . Later at a local gym , when comes to watch in a sparring match with , becomes so angered by 's presence that he pummels . Accompanied by his brother to the local open - air swimming pool , a restless spots a 15 - year - old girl named ( ) at the edge of the pool . Although he has to be reminded by his brother he is already married , the opportunity to invite her out for the day very soon comes true when gives in . Leaving at home one night , attends a church charity dance with , where he sees seated across the room with . Watching drive off with , sends to the pool the next day to arrange an introduction to her . When admires 's shiny convertible , he invites her for a ride , and after changing from her swimsuit into a virginal white outfit , she joins him . After a visit to a miniature golf course , takes her to the apartment he purchased for his father and ushers her into the bedroom , where a crucifix perches above the headboard . He nudges her onto the bed , but she quickly rises and walks to the bureau , where she looks at a photo of and sparring , a rosary dangling over its frame . In 1943 , has two fights with . scores a major victory against in the first match , which is 's first loss and the beginning of a life - long rivalry between the two boxers . Following the fight , , who is now living with , kisses his blackened eye , but when he becomes sexually aroused , he pours a pitcher of ice water down his crotch in order to preserve his energy for the next match with , which is to take place three weeks later . Although is named winner of the bout by the unanimous decision of the judges ( because he was leaving the sport temporarily for conscription in the ) , 's career takes off when he wins a series of victories and , now successful , he marries and buys a new home in the along the . In the meantime , has also married and moved into a nearby house with his wife . This does not deter from winning the next six straight fights ; the next with with in on 14 , 1944 ; the next is with in on 10 , 1945 ; with in on 17 , 1945 ; the next is with in on 12 , 1946 ; next is with in on 12 , 1946 ; and the next is with in on 14 , 1947 . As 's success and confidence grows , but so does his fears grow about his wife , , having feelings for other men . is keen enough to show off his sexual jealously . After having had three children and living a relatively quiet life in the suburbs , has gained weight and bristles when enters him into a match with newcomer , for which will have to lose 15 pounds . When explains that he set up the match because established boxers are afraid to face , supports , noting that would be an apt opponent because he is so good - looking and popular . 's comment triggers 's obsessive jealousy , and he balks at going to training camp and thus leaving alone . When asks to keep an eye on while he is gone , suggests taking her out for a night on the town before he leaves . They all go to the nightclub , and when excuses herself to go the ladies room , , who is there with , invites her to join them for a drink . Jake warily watches their encounter , and when Vickie returns to the table , accuses her of flirting with and local boss ( Colosanto).During his match with , viciously pummels his opponent in the face , destroying his good looks and winning the bout . Following his victory , returns to boxing training camp , and one night while at a nightclub , spots enter with and his friends . Pulling her away from 's table , orders to leave with him , then smashes a glass in 's face . When follows outside , kicks him , then bangs him in the head with a taxicab door . Afterward , summons and , his arm in a sling and his face bandaged , to his headquarters at the and orders them to forget their argument and shake hands . After departs , warns that is embarrassing him by not accepting his patronage . Although argues that wants to make it on his own , counters that will never get a chance at the title without his help . Upon 's return from training camp , reports that has offered him a shot at the title in exchange for throwing a match with . During the fight , offers no resistance to , allowing his opponent to strike him at will until being declared the victor . As later tearfully relates to his corner men , he did not know any other way to lose . Following the fight , is suspended by the boxing board while the district attorney probes into the possibility of a fixed fight . Two years later , in 1949 , faces middleweight champion in a title bout . Before the match , comes to 's hotel room to wish him good luck , but after kisses goodbye and leaves , slaps her and demands to know why she is so friendly with . After wins the bout on a technical knockout in the tenth round , the referee straps the championship belt around his waist . By 1950 , has developed a paunch from his extensive binges of eating and drinking , although he is set to defend his title in a month . Still insanely jealous of , suspects that she and had an affair , and when denies it , irrationally accuses him of having an affair with her . In response , advises to indulge in more sex and less food . then goes to 's bedroom to ask if she had sex with his brother . Offended , she locks herself in the bathroom , after which he breaks down the door and slaps her and refuses to accept her denials that she has been unfaithful . Proceeding to 's house , pulls his brother away from dinner with his family and begins to beat him , accusing him of adultery with . When arrives , he punches her , prompting her to go home and pack her things . She later tells that she is leaving him , but his more subdued , contrite demeanor causes her to relent and she agrees to stay , although the brothers remain estranged . In 1951 faces to defend his championship title in the " fight of the year . " As watches the bout on television , viciously pounds , sending streams of blood trickling down his legs and spewing from his mouth . Even though is declared the new champion , remains cocky and defiant . Five years later , in 1956 , , now living in , and grown fat and bloated , announces his retirement from boxing and the opening of his eponymous nightclub . As emcee , tells crude jokes and flirts with underage women customers . Tired of 's abuse , finally files for divorce and takes custody of the children . One evening , while sleeping in his office , is arrested for pandering to underage customers . To pay his legal fees , smashes his championship belt to pry out the jewels , only to be informed by the pawnbroker that the belt was worth much more intact . Unable to raise the money for his defense , , bellicose and belligerent , is thrown into solitary confinement , where he slams his head against the wall and that he is not an animal . By 1958 , , now out of jail and living in , has been reduced to introducing his new wife , , a stripper known as " 48 's , " in a dive bar . One night , he spots walking down the street and runs after him . Although smothers him with hugs and kisses , , still angry , shrugs him off . In 1964 , rehearses his lines for his one - night show at the . As he stands in front of his dressing room mirror , recites the famous speech from On the in which " " accuses his brother , " , " of betraying him , saying " I could have had class . I could 've been a contender , I could 've been somebody ... instead of a bum , which is what I am . " Before going on stage , gazes into the mirror and sparring with his reflection , declares , " Go get 'em champ . I 'm the boss . "The film ends on an ambiguous note with a Biblical quote : " All I know is this : Once I was blind , and now I can see . " -symbolizing that even men like can be redeemed.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis>"Remember , remember the fifth of , the and . I know of no reason why the should ever be forgot . "The film opens with a recitation of these words as a flashback sequence brings us to early 1600 's . is captured and executed for his attempt to blow up , a plan he hoped would restore Catholic rule to a Protestant throne . In the near future , in , a young woman named ( ) is shown preparing to go out for the night while she watches a TV program hosted by ( ) , the proclaimed ' of ' and a firm supporter of the fascist that has replaced the old government . A mysterious figure dressed in black mirrors 's actions as he too watches the program from his own home . Prothero reveals that the government is based around religion and faith , reciting the mantra ' through unity . Unity through faith ' . , violence and war ( blamed primarily on the ' former ' ) , and the fear and resentment of particular groups within the country including homosexuals , , and immigrants fueled the dramatic change and put the current leader , ( ) , in command . Evey shuts off the program and heads out the door . As she walks into an alley , she is stopped by a few men who scold her for being out past curfew . When they become physical she pulls out a can of mace but they then reveal themselves to be members of the secret police ; ' Fingermen ' , and threaten Evey with sedition . She pleads for mercy before the men grab hold of her with the intent to rape her . The cloaked figure in black appears in the alley , wearing a mask and hat , and quickly dispatches the Fingermen before introducing himself to Evey as ' V ' ( ) . Showing a penchant for theatrics with an impressive play on words , he invites Evey to accompany him to a nearby rooftop to watch a performance of his . There , they have a clear view of The and explains that he 's there to commemorate a special day in history , one he intends to use as a symbol against the tyranny that has replaced with a false idol . As tolls midnight , the fifth of , V recites the centuries - old adage before conducting the finale to 's 1812 which plays over the loudspeakers throughout the streets of . At the moment of crescendo , The explodes in a brilliant display . V laughs hysterically while can only watch in horror . Following the explosion , a congregation of 's elite meets in a secret conference with , his face projected on a large screen . Included are ( ) of the police , ( ) of television broadcasting , ( ) of the auditory surveillance system , ( - ) of the secret police , and ( ) of the . Effectively and respectively , they make up the nose , mouth , ears , fingers , and eyes of the government , with sitting at the brain . decrees that the destruction of The is to be announced as an impromptu demolition project to make way for a new building while an investigation ensues to find out who the man in the mask is . While 's remains a mystery , 's identity is quickly discovered thanks to video surveillance and demands her capture and interrogation . The next morning , working as an assistant within the broadcasting station , jokes with security guard ( ) before delivering an unmarked package to the costume department . As her supervisor opens it and discovers black cloaks and masks , V walks into the lobby of the station with a bomb strapped to his chest . and his partner ( ) hurry to the station in order to apprehend Evey while V disengages the elevators and forces most of the station to evacuate . As nervously walks through the crowd towards the stairs , she catches sight of and backed by supporting officers . She runs and hides in a nearby office while V orders the television crew to run a video on the emergency broadcast system , allowing his message to play on every TV in . He addresses the general populous and introduces the fact that there is something wrong with the country . He encourages people to speak about the truths of cruelty and injustice and put away the fear that , he explains quite frankly , put them in this situation in the first place . V admits to blowing up the , explaining that he sought to end oppression where freedom should stand and invites all of to join him in one year in front of where he promises to give them a fifth of that will never be forgot . As the broadcast ends , grabs a small video camera and follows the police to the studio where they manage to break down the door . obscures the room and a dark figure runs towards the police . They shoot the man , who is wearing a mask , but discover that he 's an employee who explains that everyone in the room was given the costumes to wear . Finch orders everyone on the ground as he and the other officers go to the control room where left his bomb wired to the control system . Dascomb attempts to disarm the bomb and is successful . Two men in masks fall out of an elevator at the other end of the floor in front of two officers and the first figure screams that the other is ' him ' . However , as one officer pulls off the mask to find it 's , the real V stands behind them and dispatches the officers with hidden knives . passes out . V goes to leave but is stopped by who fails to see Evey sneak up behind him . She taps his shoulder and maces him before he blindly hits her with his gun , rendering her unconscious . V knocks out and stops to contemplate . A bruised but alive watches the surveillance tapes later on with who watches as V looks at . He comments that is with him now , for better or worse . Meanwhile , footage of the police raid on the station is broadcast with claims that the terrorist was presumably shot and killed , much to the disbelief of one bespectacled girl ( Cook).Evey wakes up in a bed that is not her own and follows the sound of music coming from an old jukebox inside an enclosed foyer . V appears behind her and explains that , since she saved him but was unconscious , he made to decision to carry her to his lair , the , a place filled with various bits of art and culture that had previously been confiscated by . Evey thanks him and asks to be released but V tells her she must stay here until his goal to destroy is completed in a year 's time , otherwise she would be quickly captured and forced to give information about Naturally upset by her forced containment , Evey runs to her room . Much later , Evey concedes to leave her room and she finds V in the kitchen cooking eggs . He serves her and pours her tea while acknowledging his sincerity in the video he sent across . He plans to destroy , not just to bring down a building , but to instill a very powerful idea in the British people and to impress that their government should be afraid of them , instead of the other way around . Some time later we see showering in his home while watching one of his own broadcasts , repeating every word with vigor as he denounces the terrorist as a coward . V silently enters his loft with 's card and confronts as he comes out of the shower . When addresses him as commander , suddenly recognizes him . Later , and other officers investigate 's loft where his body lies on the bathroom tiles , vomit beside him and a rose across his chest . During research , finds out that was a very wealthy man well before his broadcasting show and used to be a commanding officer at , a now abandoned government facility . Back in the , after a play bout with a suit of armor , V invites Evey to watch The of ( 1934 ) with him , a film about love and revenge . After the film , catches a glimpse of the news where the death of is announced . Suspicious , Evey questions V who admits that he killed and plans to kill others for justice , though Evey does n't understand his motives . Shaken by this , she resolves to escape 's lair . To do so , she offers her assistance and some back story to her life . She explains that her parents both protested the government following the death of her little brother due to a deadly virus leak at his school . She was young but remembers the riots and protests and how her parents were taken from her in the middle of the night , black bags forced over their heads . She was sent to a juvenile detention center but never forgot the lessons her parents taught her . Inspired by this , agrees to let her help and comes up with a plan for his next victim . ( ) walks through his church and is met by a page who tells him his latest ' guest ' has arrived but is older than expected . Lilliman walks to his room where , dressed as a young girl , is waiting for him . While V scales the rooftops , Evey attempts to warn of the danger he 's in , but the thinks that her story is part of an act and tries to have sex with her , forcing her down on the bed . She manages to kick him off her , resulting in a slew of - priestly curses from him , before V enters the room . Evey apologizes and runs off before V assaults , promising no mercy . A nearby surveillance picks up the audio conversation between and and calls dispatch . Finch arrives shortly to find dead , also having vomited and with a rose on his body , before arrives with his own special force . He puts under surveillance , claiming that the extra precautions are needed since a couple of respected party members have been slain and argues that Finch put a hold on his investigations surrounding the terrorist 's link with the victims . Evey finds sanctuary with her boss , ( ) , whom she had been going to see the night she met He allows her to stay with him and , as a sign of trust , shows her a hidden room behind his wine cabinet . There , he reveals a copy of the amid photographs of homoerotic scenes with muscular men . He admits to being , like her , a fugitive and explains that he hides his true self in plain sight on television and by entertaining young women like Evey within the privacy of his home . The next morning , he coincidentally makes Evey the same breakfast V served her while she was in the . finds the coincidence funny and quips that only the things that matter most should be considered with such humor . Finch continues his investigation unabated with and focuses his attention on , the records of which prove to be stubborn in revealing much information . He does find that was also stationed there as a priest for enemies of the state that were confined there . Out of the list of high ranking officials left alive , finds just one ; a woman who worked as a chemist , although her name is unavailable . He then goes to see a coroner named ( ) and presents her with the flower that he found on . recognizes the flower as a scarlet carson , thought to be extinct , but admits that she ca n't offer any other information . When Finch returns to headquarters , informs him that he 's found out who the mystery woman is ; . Shocked , having just seen her , Finch leaves , hoping he 's not too late . wakes in her bed and speaks to the shadows in her room , asking if he 's come to kill her . V appears and responds yes , to 's relief . She converses with , admitting fault in what happened to him but defending her intentions , which were for the best . Though V tells her he can not allow her to live , he reveals to have given her a quick injection while she slept , providing an easy and painless death . apologizes and succumbs peacefully moments before arrives to find her in bed with a scarlet carson in her hand and a small red notebook on her bedside table . Finch presents the notebook to who dismisses the contents as either propaganda written by the terrorist or the ravings of a delusional ex - party member . advises to forget about the journal , but ca n't help but recall what he read . The notebook was a diary of 's and chronicled her start at 20 years prior as a medicinal chemist . She writes how she tested virulent drugs on vagrants and deviants of society who she found herself despising because of their pathetic disposition . She mentioned working alongside both and . All tests on subjects proved fatal except in the case of one man who resided in room five . In his case , though he had a near complete loss of memory , he developed quick reflexes and strength . On fifth , the laboratory where she worked exploded violently and , as she escaped the compound , saw the man from room five , horribly burnt and roaring in anger . Evey , meanwhile , shares an evening with as he shows her the premiere of a new show he wrote that morning and uncensored by the department . She gulps her champagne as she watches welcome ( an actor impersonator , as the real watches from his own home ) to his studio while armed soldiers hold shotguns towards the audience , prompting them to applaud . is offered a glass of warm milk in reference to the real 's habit of drinking one every night ( we see this is indeed true ) . A hilarious skit ensues as an actor dressed as V ties 's shoelaces together while he calmly assures everyone that the terrorist has been neutralized . Upon discovering V trying to blend in the studio band , stumbles on his feet and a comedic chase progresses across the stage to the sound of . Finally , grabs hold of V and removes his mask to reveal another copy who says that he 's the real one . They both order the soldiers to open fire and are shot down while the audience laughs and the real breaks his glass in fury . While is worried that will face severe repercussions , he is optimistic and tells her not to fret . However , that night , Evey awakes to glass breaking as rushes into her room , telling her to hide . She gets under her bed ( mirroring the scenario when her parents were taken from her ) as the bedroom door is broken down . Creedy enters with soldiers and they beat and restrain , placing a black bag over his head and taking him away . Evey manages to climb out the window down to the back yard , but she is apprehended and black - bagged just before she can escape . When the bag is removed , she finds herself in an interrogation room with a government official hidden in darkness asking her about the location of the terrorist . When she is unable to answer , she is ' processed ' . Her head is shaven and she is tortured and given rotten food while kept in a small cell . One day , she hears a rustle from inside one of the side walls and discovers a small note written on toilet paper . She uses the light coming from under the door to read the note from a woman named who tells a brief story of her life and how she wound up confined . ( young - Poots older - ) describes how she first fell in love with a girl in her class named ( ) and when she was disowned by her parents for being a lesbian . She met the love of her life , ( ) , while acting in a film and they moved to together as 's war worsened and the government began to change . Fear and persecution against anyone unworthy in 's mind , including homosexuals and , led to their detainment . was taken away shortly before was . She ends her note by offering some solace in the fact that , while her life may be taken , she will still retain her integrity as a human being and tells the reader that , though she does not know them , she loves them . Tearfully inspired , is once again brought to the interrogation room where she refuses to cooperate , despite threats of death . She is returned to her cell to await execution . An official arrives and asks Evey to give just one bit of information to save her life , but says she 'd rather die . The man then tells her that she now has no fear and is completely free before leaving . Confused , gets to her feet and walks out the open door . She goes down a corridor and turns a corner to see that she is in none other than the . V appears before her and explains that he was the one to bring her here and that was unfortunately executed once the police found the hidden room behind the wine cabinet . V tells her that , while her imprisonment was a farce , it was to bring out in Evey what experienced ; to allow her to let go of fear and hate and realize that there 's something more important than even her life . Evey angrily retorts , claiming the inability to feel anything anymore and collapses to the ground , short of breath . V catches her and comforts her , asking her to remember the atrocities committed against her and her family and recall what she felt when she said she 'd rather die than give in . But Evey begs to be let outside , feeling faint . V takes her to the roof where it is raining . Before he can cover her with a blanket , Evey steps out into the rain and raises her arms , laughing in a moment of pure release , just as once did . Back in the , tells V that she can no longer stay with him and , now that she fears nothing , will return to the outside world to take her chances . She motions to give the note she found , thinking he wrote it , but he shows her a shrine surrounded by scarlet carsons with 's photo above it . He tells Evey that the note was delivered to him as it was to her and that died in where he was also kept . He maintains his vindication that what was done to him must be repaid . Evey approaches V and thanks him before agreeing to his request to visit one last time before the fifth . She then leaves . V returns to his room and removes his mask , throwing it against the vanity mirror and breaking down in tears . At an elite meeting with the party members , reminds them that their inadequacies are mounting , especially those of , in the attempt to apprehend and stop the terrorist . He issues stricter curfews and harsher surveillance on civilians who , he is angered to hear , converse regularly about the terrorist and how they believe he is still alive . Finch is contacted by a mysterious man named who promises to give him invaluable information regarding his investigation . Intrigued and having come to his own predispositions about the shady goings on of the government , goes out to meet him in a secluded lot . Rookwood tells him of the origins of who came into his own by starting his own party that gained recognition by divulging in tests for biological weapons in the name of national security . From the blood of one of their victims ( namely , , which explains his determination for retribution ; he feels to blame ) they were able to procure a deadly virus that they secretly released , with strategic precision , within their own country ; inside a school , a tube station , and a water - treatment plant for maximum effect . Naturally , when the public panicked and went in search of a savior , the very party that released the virus is the one to magically provide a cure . In return , they gained power , using fear and scapegoats out of political extremists to justify their cause and to blame the initial virus on . then advises to put surveillance on so that may feel confident to show himself again and prove all he 's said to the inspector . hesitantly agrees . However , he is infuriated later when he discovers that the character of has actually been dead quite some time ; it was V in disguise all along . Finch goes back to his previous investigation while remains under supervision . V visits in his home , playing loud music so that their conversation can not be taped and offers a proposition . He tells him that , once he destroys , will have no use for and will offer him up as someone to blame . If gives to , 's position will be suddenly promoted and he will have V to deal with as he chooses . As the fifth of nears , thousands of crates are delivered throughout , including to . He opens the box to discover a costume with a black cloak , hat , and mask . The little bespectacled girl seen earlier proudly wears her costume on the streets but decrees that anyone seen wearing them will be arrested on site . Finch speaks with in private , speculating that what follows will be what wanted all along ; complete and utter chaos . Everything is part of a plan ; a grand scheme that was put into effect before the government had even fully formed , even before . And when someone does something stupid , everything will fall apart . This speculation is metaphorically shown as die falling into place within a large arrangement that V sets up on the floor of his gallery , all while citizens across begin to riot . The bespectacled girl is shot down by a fingerman in her costume and , though he displays his badge to enraged adults , he is mercilessly beaten . The party convenes for the last time in front of where he fumes over their inability to capture the terrorist . He proclaims that , should anything happen to , the only thing that will change will be that he reads 's resignation the following morning instead of the newspaper . He then demands , amid claims that record arrests are being made , that the citizens of the nation need to be reminded of why they need the government . Evey returns to the on the eve of the fifth where is musing over his music . He admits that he never expected to see her again and asks her to dance . She asks to see his face , since she still knows nearly nothing about him , but he affirms that the face he has is not who he really is . He then says he has something to give her and leads her out of the gallery to an abandoned subway tunne beneath the building . There sits a train filled with explosives which says will course along its track straight to , as long as decides it should . V says that the decision to move forward should be the people 's to make , not his . He will , meanwhile , go meet his fate . Evey begs him to stay , kissing him , but he solemnly refuses and disappears down the tunnel . While V heads to a dark section underground to meet with his most trusted soldiers , gives a speech on the emergency broadcast system throughout , urging people to stay in their homes and vowing swift justice against anyone caught outside past curfew . However , each room and venue the speech plays to is void of an audience . V appears to who has held his end of the bargain ; , bound and black - bagged on his knees . V places a scarlet carson in 's lapel before shoots him in the head . Creedy then demands that V remove his mask . When refuses , orders his men to open fire . V is hit by a barrage of bullets but composes himself . He rushes forward with his knives , killing each soldier before they can reload . Creedy shoots V multiple times , wondering aloud why he wo n't die , before tells him that beneath his mask is more than flesh ; " there 's an idea , and ideas are bullet - proof " . V puts his hands around 's neck and breaks it swiftly before staggering back down the tunnel . He removes a large metal chest plate , having saved himself from immediate death , but continues to bleed profusely from other wounds . Evey waits for him back by the train , contemplating what he told her , as he returns , collapsing to the ground . She takes him in her arms and he tells her that he ' is done and finished ' before confessing to having fallen in love with her after so many years of living with nothing but revenge as the reason for his existence . Evey tells him she does n't want him to die , to which he says that that 's the most beautiful thing she could have given him , before dying . Meanwhile , armed guards surround but can not get in touch with anyone of authority . Soon , they see a massive mob of people walking towards them , all clad in costumes . Without a voice to give orders , they are forced to put down their weapons and allow the people to walk past them . Finch finds his way into the subway and discovers at the controls to the train . She had placed V on a bench inside the train , arms crossed and covered in roses . She tells that the country needs more than a building now ; it needs hope , as she pulls the lever and steps out of the train . As the car moves forward , she leads to the roof where they have a clear view of . In front of them , and all the people convened , explodes in a radiant display to 's . Finch asks who V was . Evey says that he was her brother , father , mother , and friend . " He was you , and he was me . He was all of us " , setting in her words that represented the whole country , finally strong enough to take back its freedom . The citizens in front of remove their masks , revealing , , , the bespectacled girl , and all those who dreamed of freedom and finally received it . Evey gives a closing narration , stating " no one will ever forget that night , and what it meant for the country . But I will never forget the man , and what he meant for me . " as several red fireworks launch in a V formation , symbolizing the man who gave that country hope . The screen fades to black and credits roll.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The film opens in , a cotton plantation owned by the proud ( ) , a self - made man of Irish descent , in the state of near . The date is 1861 . He and his wife , ( ) , have three beautiful daughters ; ( ) , ( ) , and the 16 - year - old ( ) . spends her days having fun , tormenting the household servants , and flirting , especially with twins and ( , ) . The brothers anticipate the next ball and hope will choose one of them to attend the ball . The speculate the impending war between the and the due to the recent attack on . finds the latter topic boring and is certain that there will be no war . She runs off to meet her father who is riding home through the fields . He returns home with some news . ( ) hosts a barbecue party at his Twelve Oaks plantation . pines for ' son , ( ) , a lanky , soft - spoken young man of refined bearing , though he does n't reciprocate her feelings . While she prepares for the party her servant , ( ) , walks in with a large tray of food meant for to eat so she wo n't eat at the picnic . refuses to eat and also insists on wearing her favorite dress with a plunging neckline , hoping to attract attention from the single men ( ) at the party . is more willful than and finally gets her to comply , though wins the fight over what dress she will wear . At the picnic flirts shamelessly with other beaux despite her willful obsession for . All the young women go inside for an afternoon nap while the men meet in the parlor for cigars and brandy . Most of them boast of how the will surely win the war but one gentleman , ( ) , a visitor from , , disagrees . He states that the can not win a protracted war purely through the exhibition of pride and notes how the is better equipped , industrially superior , has a larger population , and able to produce weapons of war quickly having learned this from his own personal visits to the northern states . ( ) , another prideful plantation owner , is offended by 's opinion and openly tells him so , even going so far as to suggest a duel with pistols for both his and the 's honor . , knowing full well that he 's a much better shot than and that this argument is not worth his life , turns down the duel challenge and leaves the parlor . brands a coward for turning down his duel offer , but assures him that would have killed him in the duel . While the other girls are sleeping , slips away from the nap room to speak to in the parlor . She declares her love for him but tells her that he intends to marry his cousin ( ) , ' sister . is infuriated and berates for making her think he was in love with her . She maintains that is too fair and ca n't compete with 's looks , despite the fact that is admired for her kindness and altruism . then walks out of the parlor . In her anger , throws a vase at the wall , breaking it to pieces . suddenly pops up from the couch where he 'd been resting and jokingly asks whether the war has begun . is outraged and defends when mocks him . When leaves , laughs to himself : has announced that she would hate forever , but she still defends him . The start of the war is finally announced and all the young gentlemen rush to enlist . is betrothed to 's sister , ( ) but , when flirts with him to get a rise out of , he proposes to her instead . Still angry at for rejecting her , agrees . They quickly marry before leaves for the front lines . offers herself to but he denies her again , kissing her lightly on the cheek . Just a few months later , news comes of ' death from illness while stationed at the front . Wishing for her widowed daughter to cheer up ( though is sullen for the wrong reasons ) , suggests that she go to to live with and her ( ) . agrees to go , but only because it will give her the chance to see again . believes this decision is not in 's best interest and tells her so . In 1862 , attends a fund raising ball for the in where she , as a recent widow , is not supposed to enjoy herself and must remain off to the side wearing a black gown . She dances surreptitiously behind the counter of her charity stall , receiving looks of disapproval as the people around her whisper rumors of her supposed mourning . is also in attendance , now known as an arms smuggler to benefit the Southern cause despite his cynical attitude towards the war 's aims . His motivation is simply to make a profit and his skills in smuggling allowed him to obtain the ball decorations and make it past Southern blockades . , by now having married , offers her wedding ring as a war contribution , a generous move that feels obliged to follow . This incites to sarcastically praise her consideration . An auction is then held for the men to bid on a dance with a girl of their choosing . wins the auction and chooses , causing consternation in the crowd because of 's position as a widow . However , she accepts 's invitation to dance and , while they do , tells her that he someday wants to hear her say that she loves him . confidently proclaims that will never happen as long as she lives . Another year later , of 1863 arrives and returns home from the war front on furlough . Still in love with him , once again attempts to woo him but with no success . Just before 's departure day , manages to see him alone and gives him a present , tearfully confessing that she only married to hurt him . makes promise to take care of before they share one passionate kiss . leaves once more to rejoin the war effort . Eight months pass , during which the war drags on and the situation in the worsens . Food becomes scarce and nearly every family has lost loved ones to battle . and , now pregnant with 's child , volunteer as nurses caring for wounded soldiers in nearby . despises her new role , doubled upon her responsibilities as the sole person to manage 's home since is incompetent and grows weaker due to her difficult pregnancy . faces the harsh realities of war as she listens to a dying soldier ( ) reminisce about his brother and witnesses another ( ) suffer a leg amputation without anesthetic . The useless leaves the city , finding the noise of artillery annoying , and renders to care for the weakened with no one but the house servant , ( ) , to help . When goes into labor , , intent on keeping her promise to , employs the help of ( ) who had previously been watching 's progress . However , he is unable to leave the train station where he is tending to hundreds of wounded and dying soldiers . When , who had claimed to know all there is to childbirth , admits that she knows nothing , takes control , fueled by her anger . Though 's labor is long and complicated , she eventually gives birth to a son ( ) but is left severely weak . sends to find the one man who can get them all safely out of before the approaching troops take siege : . finds him enjoying himself at a local brothel run by ( ) . Though mocks , he agrees to assist who insists on returning home to . steals a horse and cart and fetches , , her baby , and , taking them through as the city burns in wake of the advance . They fight off some looters who try to steal their horse . Once safely outside the city , leaves them to continue to alone , telling that he 's going to enlist in the army because he believes only in lost causes ' when they are really lost ' . begs him not to go and he professes his love for her , claiming to have never loved anyone else so fiercely . rebuffs his advances but he kisses her , paying for it with a slap across the face . gives her his pistol and walks off , leaving in tears . The women continue on their journey to alone , traveling mostly by night to avoid enemy Federal troops . When can no longer lactate for the baby , they resolve to milk a stray cow for sustenance . They pass the ' plantation which has befallen the same fate as many others , having burned to the ground . tries to stand but collapses upon seeing the scorched crosses marking the graves of her entire family . Under moonlight and just as their horse dies of exhaustion , they arrive at to find it still standing but derelict , having been used as headquarters for Northern troops . The fields are untended and the grounds have been pillaged but finds that her father , her sisters , and two of their house servants , and ( ) , remain , the rest of the servants / slaves having either run away or forcibly conscripted into the army . discovers that her mother recently passed away from fever , leaving her already disturbed father practically insane . With barely any food , no livestock to speak of , and no money , wanders into the fields to clear her head . She pulls a dried up carrot out of the ground to bite into it , only to throw up immediately afterwards . Resolving not to give up , she stands defiantly , saying , " As is my witness , I 'll never be hungry again!"IntermissionMonths pass and the war enters its final stages . marches his Northern armies through in his so - called ' to the ' , leaving a wide swath of destruction in his path . and her sisters have been forced to make the best of things , performing manual labor themselves to keep running and in repair . remains weakened from childbirth and is reduced to spending most of her time in bed . At a moment when is scolding her for getting out of bed again , wishing to help , a renegade soldier ( ) enters the home . He claims that he 's simply looking for valuables to move on with but , when he threatens , she takes the gun that gave her and shoots him in the face . The soldier falls dead down the staircase . is a witness , having crawled out of bed with 's saber . She promises not to tell the others what happened while searches the soldier , finding legitimate cash and other valuables . They dispose of the body and explain to 's father and sisters that her gun had accidentally discharged . uses 's nightgown to wrap the dead soldier 's bloody head up and drags the body off , planning to bury it in the orchard . Some months later , in spring of 1865 , the war is finally over . Confederate soldiers amble back home in the wake of 's surrender . One of them , ( ) , arrives at and , having long been in love with , asks 's permission to marry her . Tara soon becomes a haven for passing soldiers who are given food and rest , mostly at the behest of , much to the dismay of , who reminds her that their supplies are already meager enough . One soldier ( ) gives the news that is still alive but is a prisoner at a camp . Soon enough another few months later , arrives at and rushes to embrace him . is tempted to do the same but is held back by ; she has no rights to him . To her torment , stays at with and his son ( Holt).During the first year - and - a - half of , high taxes are imposed on the Southern plantations by Northern carpetbaggers , much to 's dismay . Terrified that she will lose , she seeks comfort from though does n't believe anything good will come of it . begs to come away with her to where they can start anew . He kisses her and admits that he loves her and admires her courage but simply ca n't leave and his son behind . reminds that she still has which she should love more than him and thrusts some of its red dirt into her hand . He tells her that the Southern civilization and its way of life with slavery is gone forever and that he intends to move to with his family to work as a banker . throws a tantrum and , when the commotion attracts 's attention , she naively suggests that she and remain in to help . Dejected , gives in . ( ) , former overseer of , now prosperous due to collaboration with the carpetbaggers , offers to buy from . Though the tax has risen to nearly $ 300 , rejects the offer and humiliates by throwing a clump of dirt in his face . As he leaves , 's father , his mind all but completely lost , chases him down on his horse , attempting to upbraid him . However , the horse falls while attempting to jump over a fence and is killed in the fall . After burying her father , again seeks the help of the only man she knows who possesses enough wealth to help her : . Despite holding a 's rank , is being held in the city jail in by forces who are threatening to hang him unless he hands over his gold . Prior to the war , had moved all his wealth to banks in , where it would be safe . Conditions in the jail , however , are hardly bleak : plays cards , gambles and drinks with soldiers , tells them stories about his life as a blockade runner , and he even receives female visitations . decides to dress up for the occasion and enlists to create a new dress for her out of the curtains hanging at . Mammy accompanies to to keep her out of trouble . Posing as one of 's " sisters " , is allowed to visit with privately at the city jail and attempts to present herself with an air of elegance , claiming that life at is like paradise . , however , sees through the deception when he notices her roughened hands from working the fields . Despite her anger , she continues to beg for money and even offers to be his mistress . dismisses her and informs her that if he 'd tried to use his own funds to help her , the would come down on him immediately . On her way out , passes waiting for a visit . Noticing how well - dressed she is , figures that she knows how to get the money . While walking through town , and come across , now a successful businessman selling hardware and wood with which the city is being rebuilt . claims to be saving all his money to marry and bring her to the city . Sensing an opportunity , tells that is marrying another man and presents herself open to , despite 's disapproving looks . Arriving back at , is heartbroken and sullen , having just learned that hastily married and that he has paid off 's debts . She scolds for having been married twice already and relents that she seems to be destined to become a spinster . Throughout that year ( 1866 ) , 's hardware and lumber store flourishes under 's management . She refuses credit to her poor neighbors and makes lucrative deals with Northern businessmen . They expand further , buying a sawmill to expand 's smaller interest in the lumber industry , and starts to regain part of its former splendor . hires hungry convicts who are exploited by a cruel , former prison overseer ( ) . expresses his discomfort at the thought of the convicts being abused , starved and used as slave labor but is determined to allow it . One day , comes across , who is now free and very wealthy . He laughs , saying that she could have married him and become rich if she had waited . She brushes him off and leaves alone for the sawmill . points out that the shantytown on the way to the sawmill is full of dangerous criminals and deserters but shows him that she carries the pistol he 'd given her during the war . On the way to the sawmill , two men attack from behind and overpower her before she can use her gun . , faints . The men appear to be on the verge of raping her when ( ) , a former slave at , saves her by beating up the two men who flee . News of the event spreads quickly through the town . That evening , drops and off at the ' home while he and go out to a " political meeting . " The women sense that something is afoot and reads aloud from the book ' ' in an attempt to relieve the tension . appears some time later and tells the women that the men have formed a vigilante group to punish the attackers but that the army has been tipped off and those at the meeting are now in danger . tells where they are meeting , considering him trustworthy despite 's advice to the contrary and 's belief that he 's a spy . says he will do what he can . Several hours later , appears back at the home with and , with a squad of soldiers right behind them . The three men seem to be completely drunk and tells the captain , ( ) that they have just spent the evening at the bordello establishment of , who should confirm their story . The women , including , are shocked and embarrassed , but the captain believes the explanation and departs after apologizing for their intrusion ( after reminds he is also a frequenter of 's bordello as well ) . Once the troops leave , drops the curtain and instantly sobers ( having just pretended to be drunk ) , revealing there was a skirmish in the shantytown . is wounded , having been shot in the shoulder but the two men who attacked are now dead , along with several others . More worried about , neglects to inquire about her own husband , . finally mentions that he was killed in the skirmish and is still there , lying dead in the road . Some days later , meets with and thanks her for helping their men stay out of trouble by backing up their false alibi . says that she has a son studying up and helped the men because of rather than . cautions about speaking to her in public from now on as it would damage 's reputation but persists that she would be happy to speak to anytime . A few days later visits the now twice - widowed . He realizes that she has been drinking heavily despite her attempts to cover up the smell with cologne . She tells that she will never love him because she 's in love with another man , but she will marry him because of his money . says that they are two of a kind ; partners in crime , and he marries her anyway . and have a luxurious honeymoon in and return to so that can use her new riches to restore its full glory . also buys a large mansion in where they will live on a regular basis . In time they have a child whom confidently names after remarks ( newborn : , 2 year - old : ) on her brilliant blue eyes . After her daughter 's birth , becomes depressed over her waning youth and her unrequited love for . She informs that she wants no more children and will no longer sleep with him . Furious , threatens her with divorce and storms out to find consolation at 's . Although he has grounds for divorce , continues with the sham marriage in order to keep up social appearances for 's sake . becomes a sort of substitute for in 's eyes . Over the next few years , dotes on the child , spoiling her and giving her the best of everything , including a pony and riding lessons and making sure she 's accepted socially throughout by the best classes of people . In 1871 , and ( ) discover hugging at the hardware store . Although the hug was rather innocent , knows that rumors will fly . That night is 's birthday party and , who has heard the gossip , forces to go in a daring red taffeta dress which would be considered very inappropriate for the occasion . is the only person who welcomes . Back at the mansion , finds completely drunk . They have an angry confrontation and , after he drunkenly threatens to kill her to make her forget , this time , refuses to take no for an answer . He carries off to the bedroom . The next morning , seems deliriously happy . When arrives to apologize and propose a divorce , her good mood vanishes . promises to take care of financially but insists on taking away with him . rejects his offer , as it would be a disgrace . then leaves on an extended trip to and still takes with him . In some months later , five - year - old ( ) has nightmares and ca n't sleep in the dark . Her stuffy English nurse ( - ) believes that the ordeal will build the child 's character but dismisses her and lets sleep with a candlelight on . The homesick begs to return to her mother . When and return to , tells him that she 's pregnant again . reacts coldly and ups the ante by saying she wishes the baby were not his , to which retorts , " Maybe you 'll have an accident . " takes a sudden blind swing at who dodges it . falls down the stairs and loses her baby . Later , at the behest of who has become pregnant again , makes an effort to be kind to . Sitting on the back terrace of their mansion , and discuss the possibility of giving up the lumber business to devote herself to her husband and child . A reconciliation begins to seem possible when , at that moment , insists stubbornly on jumping a fence with her pony after she raised the bar . remembers her father 's death and has a premonition of disaster . Her worst fears come true as the pony refuses to jump and fatally throws over the fence . is devastated by 's death and refuses to release the child 's body for burial for several days despite 's wishes . locks himself in his room with the body after shooting the pony , refusing to allow anyone in , including who can only bang on the door screaming at him . arrives at the mansion and is led upstairs by , who tearfully relays the past few days events : refuses to talk to anyone and vengefully shot the pony after the accident . manages to get to allow her into the room and allow undertakers to take away 's dead body . , overwrought with emotion , collapses and goes into labor . Upon a doctor 's examination following the birth of a stillborn infant , he determines that is dying from internal bleeding . In a final meeting with , asks her to look after . When dies , is left a broken man and he tells that was always his true love , a devastating revelation to , who then realizes that she never really loved and can only wish that he had been clearer about his own feelings for her . , witness to the scene , stalks off to his and 's home . returns to the mansion seeking . Having seen with at 's house , tells her that she will never stop loving and so he is leaving her , for good , to start a new life back in his hometown of . As begins to pack his suitcase to leave , insists that she now realizes that she loves and never truly loved but maintains that any chance of saving their marriage died with , and that he 's tolerated 's drama long enough . As he prepares to walk out the door , begs him one last time , asking what will happen to her if he leaves . Indifferent , replies , " Frankly , my dear , I do n't give a damn . " and strides out of the house into the evening fog . collapses on the stairs in anguish . She pulls back from despair only when she thinks of the other great love of her life , , through a series of reminiscences in voice - over . is determined to return to , make a new start , and try to somehow get back , saying to herself , " After all , tomorrow is another day!"In the final shot , we see silhouetted against as the sun sets over the hill , having arrived back at her childhood home and now facing an unknown , but new , > 

 < synopsis > Long - time friends ; , , and decide to put together  100,000 to play 3 card brag against " " - a porn king of notorious disposition - in a high - stakes card game in the hopes of winning easy money . Aided by " the Baptist " , 's personal bodyguard and counselor , the game is fixed so that , the card shark representing the group , loses to and is forced to pay a  500,000 debt within one week , citing the loss of fingers and 's father 's bar if he fails to pay . To 's fortune , and the dismay of his friends , all four of the group are tasked with honoring this debt , as they were all responsible for fronting the stake money . Harrys loyal and violent debt collector , - who often brings his son and apprentice , , to his work - is assigned to collect the payment on the due date . After several days and no ideas to come up with the money , returns home and overhears his neighbors , a gang of thieves known for robbing drug dealers , planning a heist on some marijuana growers supposedly loaded with cash and drugs . relays this information to the group , intending for all of them to rob the neighbors as they come back from their heist , therefore solving the debt . uses his connection with an underground dealer , known as " the " , to provide them with guns for the job , and to find someone to help them move the drugs . then manages to acquire a pair of antique shotguns , and arrange a deal with , a gangster and sociopath , to purchase the stolen weed . Prior to the card game , a pair of lowlife criminals , and , were hired by to rob a bankrupt millionaire for , who wanted a specific pair of antique shotguns from the stolen pile for his personal collection . The two guns that wanted , however , were the ones that and sold prematurely to after the robbery . An enraged then threatens the two into getting them back . The neighbors ' heist goes underway ; , the leader of the gang , learned of the weed chemists from one of the members , and uses his connections to the group to catch them off guard . Despite having a gang member killed by his own , and an incriminating encounter with a traffic warden , the job is otherwise a success . Unfortunately as they come back to the hideout , the four friends ambush the neighbors and take the loot , who later return that night to stash the goods next door , and then celebrate with a wild night of drinking . The various characters finally collide when discovers that the weed he was going to purchase was in fact his ; the weed chemists that were robbed were under his employ . Rory interrogates into revealing where the four friends live , and uses one of the chemists to identify the robbers . That same morning , has become furious at having been cheated and , during a tirade , he launches one of his men into a wall , who discovers ( through the hole he makes as a result ) various sound recording equipment ; realizes that his neighbors were the ones who robbed him , and has the men prepare to ambush the friends in the flat as he takes the antique shotguns and counts the money . and call , who ( in frustration ) directs them to the same address in their search for the antique shotguns , while and his son depart to collect the debt , and the four friends drive home from the bar . Rory and his gang assault the flat and enter a shootout with the neighbors , resulting in the deaths of all but and the lone chemist to survive the slaughter , with the latter taking off with the marijuana . is mugged by of the shotguns and money during his escape , and stealthily follow , and the four friends finally return to the flat , shocked by the carnage and the missing loot . Big then gives the guns and cash to , and as he returns to his car he encounters threatening his son , who wants him to get the loot back from . Desperate to get the guns , and attack and at their office , realizing who they were at the last minute before killing each other in another violent shootout . The four friends soon arrive to find another scene of carnage , and take the opportunity to re - steal the debt money , mystified by their strange fortune . Big then crashes into their car to disable , and after brutalizing him with his car door , he takes the debt money back from the unconscious friends , only to find his employer dead , and just about to make off with the antique shotguns , which he 'd briefly paused to examine . The remaining friends were arrested , but were declared innocent after the traffic warden from earlier identified the neighbors bodies as the prime suspects . The four reunite at fathers bar , and decide to have get rid of the only evidence linking them to all the bloodshed the shotguns . After leaves , arrives to bid them farewell , and gives them a catalog on antique guns . Big then leaves , having kept the debt money for himself and his son . A quick perusal of the book reveals that the shotguns the four had bought for the job were each worth a fortune , and so they desperately try to call . The film ends in a cliffhanger when cell phone , stuffed in his mouth , starts ringing as he hangs over the side of a bridge , preparing to drop the shotguns into the > 

 < synopsis > is a girl born in . Five emotions live inside her head . They are responsible for her actions and make her memories . The memories are kept as balls . They each give a different color depending on the emotion of the memory . The most important memories are core memories that power islands of personality . They reflect a different aspect of 's life . makes happy . Fear keeps her safe . Disgust prevents her from being poisoned , physically and socially . Anger makes her life fair . Sadness however , does n't seem to have a purpose . She 's ignored as a result . turns eleven . Her parents move to . Sadness has a magical touch . When she touches a memory , it turns sad and blue , and it ca n't be changed back to what it was before . forbids from touching any more memories until she finds out what 's going on . The first day at the new school , has Sadness stand inside a circle so she ca n't spread her gloominess . talks about her life in . brings up a memory and has it played on a projector in 's head . Sadness wanders outside her circle and touches the memory , turning it sad . While the emotions are trying to remove the memory from the projector , Sadness takes control of the console , making cry in front of her classmates . A new core memory is created . This core memory is sad and blue . 's only had happy core memories before . sees sad memories as a bad thing . She tries to get rid of it . Sadness tries to stop her , saying it 's a core memory . In their struggle , all the core memories are knocked from the holder they 're kept in . , and the core memories are sucked up the tube , into the far depths of 's mind . and are in , a labyrinth of corridors of shelves of memories . They meet 's former imaginary friend , who 's desperate to reconnect with . He says the of can take them back to . Their journey takes them through and . Parts of are being demolished , and the of . Mind workers are taking 's song - powered rocket to the , a deep pit where obsolete memories are erased . A plow pushes the rocket into the dump . is really upset over the loss of his rocket . He 's completely unresponsive when tries to cheer him up . Sadness listens to what has to say . He and had great adventures together . They were best friends . It 's sad . Bing hugs . He cries candy . He 's okay now . He continues to take the emotions to the train station . Joy wonders how did Sadness do that?In , , and try to take charge in 's absence . They 're unable to make happy . Dinner ends in disaster . The father sends to her room for her rude , disrespectful behavior . Later that evening , the father ca n't cheer up with his monkey noises . dumps her best friend and quits hockey . , and fall into the . Anger comes up with the idea : 's happy core memories were made in . The only way for her to be happy is to return there and make more . , and are on the of . Unfortunately , the train does not run while 's asleep . They enter . 's idea is to wake up with exhilaration , excite her awake . A dog costume , is in the front . Sadness is in the back . lets down a brightly colored curtain and balloons . The dog costume is ripped in half , but due to the reality distortion filter , it looks as if a real dog has split in two in the dream . Despite all this , stays asleep . Security men capture and take him to the , a place where they keep 's deepest , darkest fears . is trapped in a cage of balloons , on the belly of a giant , sleeping birthday clown named . frees . Before they leave , and wake up Jangles who chases them into . Fear is on dream duty . The sight of really scares him and wakes up . The train is running again . picks out a memory . It 's the time in the twisty tree . Mom and and the hockey team are cheering . Sadness loves this memory too . " It was the day the lost the big playoff game . missed the winning shot . She felt awful . She wanted to quit . carries out his idea to run away . is led to steal her mother 's credit card to pay for her travel expenses . crumbles . The crumbling island bashes into the railway line of the of . The train crashes against . Mind workers rescue , Sadness and from the train , before it falls into the . The three characters find a recall tube . When Sadness tries to get in the tube , the core memories start to turn blue . thinks should be happy . She closes the tube and starts to get sucked up , leaving Sadness and behind . As crumbles and breaks away , the recall tube shatters . and fall into the . finds the sad core memory . She looks back over 's obsolete memories . She just wanted to be happy . She picks up the twisty tree memory and rewinds it to find it 's sad at the beginning . Sadness ' words echo " It was the day the lost the big playoff game . missed the winning shot . She felt awful . She wanted to quit . " Mom and and the team , they came to help because of . and find the song - powered rocket . They try to use it to escape the dump , but the rocket falls short each time . The third time they power up the rocket , gets out of the rocket at the last second , allowing to escape the dump . Bing thanks for letting him be important one last time , before fading away . In , the emotions discover running away was a bad idea . , the last remaining island starts to break apart and fall . The console starts to shut itself down and become inactive . becomes completely unresponsive to the emotions ' commands . They ca n't make feel anything . They 're also unable to remove the idea to run away . looks around for , but now believes her actions only hurt . She 's floating around on a rain cloud . The imaginary boyfriend generator , imaginary boyfriend says he would die for . It 's time for him to prove it . has the machine make lots of copies of imaginary boyfriends . She unties a balloon and lets the air out , blowing it towards so her cloud floats towards . builds a ladder of imaginary boyfriends . She 's standing on top of the ladder . She lets the ladder fall down . She bounces off a trampoline . She 's flying through the air over the . She grabs . The two emotions hit against the window of . Anger throws a chair at the window . The window does not break . Disgust provokes Anger so that he gets really angry . He 's the emotion . When he 's really angry , fire bursts from his head . Disgust uses his flaming head to burn a hole in the window and let and in . Sadness is magically able to remove the idea bulb , so comes home . allows Sadness to touch the core memories so they all turn sad . She allows Sadness to play the sad memories in the projector in 's head . Sadness takes control of the console . A tearful admits she misses . She wants her old friends and her hockey team . The parents need her to be happy , but she wants to go home . The parents are not angry . They miss too , the woods where they took hikes , the backyard where she used to play and where she learned to skate . The parents hug deeply . Sadness takes 's hand and they both press a button together . A new core memory is created . This core memory is yellow and blue , happy and sad . Sadness has finally found a place to work alongside her fellow emotions . They have a new expanded console . The core memories are a mixture of emotions now . has new friends and a new house . She 's twelve now . What could happen?</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) is a former tennis player who married ( ) partly for her money . To please his wife , he has given up tennis and now sells sports equipment . once had a relationship with ( ) , an American crime scriptwriter , but broke it off when he went back to the for a year . In time they stopped writing to each other , and when returns to she tells him that she burned all his letters but one . explains to that the letter was stolen by a blackmailer who demanded  50 , so payed by mailing the money to a pawn shop location as intended , but the money was never picked up and the letter was never returned . tells that he wants to tell about them so she can divorce so she and can be together , but refuses out of fear of hurting 's feelings . It is also revealed that and have made their wills , naming each other as beneficiary with assets and money totaling  90,000 . For a year , meticulously plans 's murder . She has no idea that knows of her love for . He has gone to great lengths to steal a handbag containing one of 's letters , and even assumed the role of the - based blackmailer to find out whether she would pay to have it back . ( She did , but he asked for only  50 and she did not , of course , get the letter back . ) He even watched them having a little farewell party , eating spaghetti with mushrooms in 's studio flat in . slyly withdraws small amounts of money for a year , collecting  1,000 in ( used ) one - pound (  1 ) notes , with which he plans to pay a contract killer . He singles out the perfect man to do the job : " " ( ) , who now calls himself " " , a former acquaintance who has embarked on a life of petty crime since even before leaving where he and were both students . By following him and finding out about his past and associations , soon gets enough to blackmail into murdering his wife . uses the opportunity of 's return to to carry out his plan . Under a pretext he has to prepare an urgent report for his boss , he has and go to the theatre and , when they are gone , he invites to his flat under another pretext - wanting to buy an expensive car from him . When arrives at 61A that night , gets down to business . There is no time to lose , as he has planned the murder for the following night . Trapped in a corner by the revelations of his past crimes and tempted by the money , reluctantly agrees to carry out the murder . has invited to join him at a stag party in a nearby hotel ; this is how he secures himself an alibi . The idea is that the police should think that a burglar was surprised by , that he panicked , strangled her and left without the loot . He has told that he is going to phone his own flat at exactly 11:00 p.m. so that will come to the living - room to answer the phone , whereupon she will be murdered by . There are only two keys to the ' ground floor apartment . Before leaving for the stag party , steals 's key from her handbag and hides it under the stair carpet outside their flat for to use . , a writer of crime scenarios , says at one point that , theoretically , he would be able to plan the perfect murder but that it would be impossible to carry out any plan of his because in real life people just do not act according to other people 's plans . This is true of , too : Instead of listening to the radio in her bedroom when and are away , she tells her husband of her own plans to go to the cinema that night . has a hard time persuading his wife to instead stay at home and stick into an album some old newspaper clippings of his when he was a tennis star . finally consents and for that reason takes a ( seemingly ) huge pair of scissors out of her mending basket ( which also contains a pair of her stockings ) . When she has finished the tiresome job she goes to bed , carelessly leaving the scissors lying on the desk next to the phone . According to 's plan , secretly enters the Wendices ' flat shortly before 11 o'clock , hides behind the drawn curtains , a scarf in his hands , and waits for the telephone to ring and for to come out of her bedroom to answer it . At the dinner stag , 's plans again nearly go wrong when his wristwatch stops and he has to ask for the time , and when he learns that it is a few minutes past 11:00 , he hurriedly leaves the ballroom and to a payphone in the hotel lobby to make the call . just makes the phone call exactly when is considering leaving his flat . As expected , gets up , enters the living room area , and awnsers the phone . When she does , the plan goes terribly wrong : attacks her from behind with all the while listening in to what is going on over the phone . But turns out to be rather strong and eventually stabs in the back with the scissors that are left on the desk . He falls backwards to the floor , right onto the scissors , and is dead at once . In his panic , tells his sobbing wife not to touch or do anything until he has come home , which he hurriedly does . Clearly nervous , has to work fast now if he wants to come up with an new plan to kill . He soon realizes he can make it look as if had been blackmailed by , that he came to her flat in person and that she actually let him in with the intention of murdering him ( rather than killing him in self - defense ) . After calling the police and sending back to bed , he plants 's letter on ( to make it appear that he was the one who sent blackmail letters to ) , finds the latch key on and puts it back in 's handbag , and burns the scarf that used , replacing it with one of 's stockings . He hides the twin stocking on the desk , but intentionally " accidentally " uncovers it for the police to find ( making it look as though inflicted the bruises by herself ) . Finally , tells to deny that he told her not to call the police . Although he tells her that it will lessen the police suspicion , it has the opposite effect , making it appear as though she avoided calling the police . Eventually , the police establish that came in through the hall door rather than the French windows leading into the garden , as his shoes are not dirty . After an intermission , we are introduced to ( ) , who questions the and appears to believe the evidence that planted , eventually becoming highly suspicious of . The movie cuts immediately to the trial scene where she is convicted and sentenced to be hanged , thus accomplishing 's plan after all . However , there are two things has not reckoned with : ( a ) that replaced the key under the stair carpet immediately after using it to open the door and , accordingly , the key he takes out of the dead man 's pocket is the key to 's own flat ; and ( b ) that getting rid of  1,000 in cash ( the money he would have paid to , which he does not have to now that he is dead ) by making many purchases is a conspicuous thing to do and bound to be investigated by the police ( which it is , although is not aware of this).Several months later , on the day before 's scheduled execution , visits to propose a very unusual thing to him . Rather than seeing his wife hanged , he could come up with a completely new story , confess at the last minute that he hired to kill his wife and save her life by going to prison for some years himself instead . Coincidentally , has come up with exactly what actually did . argues that during 's trial , all arguments revolved around three things only : ( 1 ) 's letter found on ; ( 2 ) the fact that no key was found on ( and that there was no forced entry either ) ; and ( 3 ) 's stocking . argues that all this could be altered , and that could put all the blame on himself , claiming that it was he who had done all that . Then arrives at the flat again , purportedly to ask about the money he has been spending lately . This is when discovers 's attach case filled with the remaining one pound notes and presents it to when he inquires to about the suitcase . Pressed for an answer , manages a final impromptu lie in front of both and : he tells them this is the money had ready when she met but that she changed her mind and killed him instead of paying him off . The inspector accepts this explanation and dismisses 's theory ... or so it seems . In fact , the inspector , who has not given up the case yet , remains suspicious of and sets a trap . He borrows the key from 's handbag which is kept in prison and goes to 's flat while is not home . He finds that it does not fit the lock . He discovers that the key actually fits 's door . After some searching , he discovers the actual key under the carpet . Then the inspector uses his final trick . He visits to ask some questions and when he leaves , he deliberately takes 's raincoat instead of his own . ( The raincoats are apparently very similar and so are the keys . ) also leaves his flat . secretly enters the flat , using the key from the raincoat , telephones the prison and asks that be released . , who does not understand why she has been released , goes home , and finds that the key in her handbag does not fit the lock . waits some time , he wants to find out whether she knows the hiding place under the stair carpet . She does not , so that clears her of any suspicion . The inspector opens the door for her . tells a colleague to take the handbag back to the police station . and then wait for 's homecoming . When comes home he realizes that he can not get inside : he is wearing 's raincoat with 's key . and , along with , hide themselves inside and do not open the door . Then remembers that he had been told to collect 's belongings from the police station , so he goes there to fetch her handbag , with the key . When he comes home he finds that the key from 's handbag - actually 's - does not fit into the lock . starts thinking what could have happened . When he takes the key from under the stair carpet he gives himself away . enters the room to find and the inspector , and too . He realizes he 's been found out and congratulates the inspector . After appearing surprised that he has finally been found out , then offers everyone a drink , acting very casual , as tears begin to stream down his wife 's face . The last scene is of the inspector , acting in a manner that shows he 's proud of himself , as he combs his mustache as he makes a phone call to inform that they have caught Tony.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The story , set in 1999 , is told in flashback form : in 1974 a federal justice agent , , becomes spellbound by and subsequently entangled in the investigation of the crime of a young woman , brutally raped and murdered inside her house in a neighbourhood . Her widowed husband , bank employee , is shocked by the news ; vows to find the killer and bring him to justice . In his ordeal he is aided by his alcoholic assistent and a newcomer , the upper class lawyer - , who takes over as department chief . 's rivaling partner pins the murder on two immigrant workers so as to get rid of the matter - an issue that enrages , who attacks in a fury . He finds a tip soon enough while looking over some old pictures provided by Morales : he comes across a dubious young man - identified as - who looks at the victim in a suspicious way in several photos . investigates the whereabouts of , and determines that he is living and working in , but fails to locate him . and break into 's household in the city of , hometown not only of , but also of 's ill - fated wife . During the illegal search , they ( unwillingly ) steal a set of letters written by the suspect to his mother . Back in , the deed earns them trouble back at the courthouse , and neither make anything out the letters . In addition , remains at large due to a careless phone call made earlier by , who desperately wanted to apprehend the killer of his wife . In the end , it is who comes across a new lead : a fellow drinker in the bar identifies the various names mentioned in the letters as being those of various soccer players of . After identifying him as a fan , and attend a soccer match where plays against in the hope of catching . With the assistance of police officer and his men , they spot him among the crowd , but a sudden goal provides the necessary disturbance for to slip away . A surreal pursuit ensues in which nearly vanishes , but he 's ultimately knocked down in the middle of the pitch . and subsequently stage a fake , largely illegal interrogation at the office . They succeed in bringing him to confess the murder by taunting him and hurting his macho pride . seems served ; however , barely a year later , is released by a spiteful , who is now working for a government agency . Amid increasing political violence , is set to work as a hitman for the far - right wing of the party . finds shot dead upon arriving home - used to pass the night at the house of his coworker , due to endless arguments with his wife about his drink problems . He presumes , and imagines , that was killed by hitmen sent after himself , perhaps under 's orders , and that posed as and sacrificed his life for his friend . A budding romance between and - the latter then recently married - is cut short by 's death and 's ultimate decision to exile himself deep within the countryside , with the help of some of 's relatives . Here the movie makes a definite stop in 1999 . After coming back from exile in 1985 , returned to an uneventful career in until his retirement . Haunted by the past , he 's determined to write down his story in novel form . He presents the framework to , still married and with children . She remains resentful and hardened from their sudden departure 24 years earlier , and for apparently never having had her feelings returned by him . drives to to meet , the widower , who has taken to a quiet life and gradually let go of his obsession with the murder case . promises him that he will not rest until he can put the convict once again in jail . A hesitant Morales then confesses to having killed many years ago , having kidnapped him and shot him in the trunk of his car . A disturbed leaves , but upon thinking over certain facts , secretly returns to 's house . Sneaking inside , he is shocked to find that Morales has a makeshift cell in his home and that he has kept chained inside for over 24 years as punishment for his wife 's death . He kept him alive by feeding him and tending to him , but not once in 24 years talking to him nor letting him out . Morales repeats what he had mantained in front of back to 1974 : that , instead of a death sentence , he believes the boredom of a meaningless life in jail to be true justice . leaves . He pays a visit to 's grave . Knowing that will never be a free man again , he finally comes to terms with his life . He visits one more time , where he finally responds to her feelings . Their love rekindled , they smilingly shut themselves in her office.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > Over a quaint area of land , shrouded by , a lone herder guides his sheep to pasture as a gigantic , metallic structure moves on four spindly legs into the highlands where the cloud cover quickly consumes it . In a nearby city , young ( : : ) sits at her window sewing adornments on a hat . Her boss enters and tells her the store is closing before inviting her out . politely declines . Some of her coworkers chatter excitedly and point outside . Sophie looks and sees the metallic object vanishing in the far off hills . The so - called ' castle ' , as the girls call it , belongs to a reclusive wizard named ( : : ) who is reputed to steal the hearts of beautiful young women . The girls joke about whether they will be preyed upon as they leave . finishes her hat and exits the store alone . She takes a trolley downtown and decides to cut through an alleyway since a parade of soldiers is moving down the main street . As she appears to look for a particular address , she bumps into a couple of soldiers who begin to flirt with her . explains that her sister is waiting for her , but the soldiers refuse to let her leave . She then backs up into a handsome young man who drapes his arm around her , claiming to have been looking for her . With a quick gesture , he forces the soldiers into a straight stance and sends them marching down the alley . He then offers to escort wherever she needs to go and tells her not to be alarmed , but he 's being followed . As they walk down the alley , a number of globular shadows appear out of the walls and begin to rush towards them . The mysterious man apologizes for getting involved and , as the shadows are about to merge on them , puts his arm around her waist before leaping high into the air . As they hover above the rooftops , he instructs her to start walking . They step through the air together and the man sets down on the balcony of her sister 's bakery . He tells her he will draw off their pursuers and that she should wait a bit before going outside again , and then leaves . Downstairs , 's sister , ( ) , is told of her arrival . She rushes upstairs to tell that she was seen floating onto the balcony with a strange man . recalls the experience as if it was a dream and later explains to that the man must have been a wizard . advises her on the dangers of trusting wizards and that , if it had been Howl , he would have surely stolen her heart . Melancholy , notes that Howl only preys upon ' pretty ' girls . resigns to this statement and warns to be careful , regardless , and that even the of the ( : : ) is on the move . asks if will spend the rest of her life in the hat shop , but reminds her that the store was important to their father . tells that she should live her own life before leaves . arrives back at the hat shop and locks the door behind her but , as she 's putting her hat away , a large and elegant woman enters through the door . tells her the shop is closed but the woman ignores her and insults the shop , calling it tacky . Growing angry , once again asks the woman to leave but is reprimanded for standing up to the of the . Before she can react , the flies towards and flows over her like a windswept fabric , covering her in dark magic . The glides back to the door and asks to give her regards to before closing the door behind her . She leaves quickly in a sedan chair carried by two ; the same globular figures that pursued earlier . When finally looks up , she is horrified to discover that she s been aged into an elderly woman . She struggles to stay calm despite her haggard appearance . The next morning , her mother ( : ) arrives at the shop to hear that is locked in her room , apparently ill . When she leaves , gets up and tries to motivate herself ; accepting that now , at least , her clothes are appropriate for her age and decides that ca n't stay at the shop . She packs a few things and leaves town , catching conversation on the streets that the prince of another country has gone missing and that war is imminent . hitches a ride out of town and heads for the mountains , despite the driver 's warning that there 's nothing out there but witches and wizards . After a while she takes a rest to eat the food she 's packed and notices a stick protruding out of a nearby bush . Deciding it will make a nice walking cane , she yanks it out with some force and realizes that its a scarecrow which is somehow standing on its own . She names it Turnip - head before strolling away . Turnip - head follows , hopping along on its pole , despite her objections to having dealt with enough magic for the day . As the sky grows darker and the wind picks up , struggles up the hillside . Turnip - head fetches a walking stick for her which she gratefully accepts before asking if there is a place where she can find shelter . Turnip - head bounces away and muses to herself how clever she 's gotten to have convinced him to leave . However , Turnip - head soon returns , to 's shock , with 's close behind . Though it is the last thing was thinking of when she asked for shelter , she discovers a back door hanging from the rear of the castle as it walks over her . She runs for the door and is allowed entry . Nothing stirs within and there is no light save for a single fire set on a large hearth . sits herself down on a chair in front of the fire , commenting how the place is less like a castle and more like a living room overstuffed with junk . Still , in her old age she realizes nothing scares her anymore and begins to doze off . Suddenly , the fire in front of her conjures eyes and notes that has quite a curse on her . It introduces itself as a powerful fire demon named ( : : ) and offers to relieve 's curse if she helps him with his . asks if he can be trusted and denies his proposal but he pleads with her and claims that his master , , keeps him under a tight regimen . Falling asleep , relents and agrees to help him though , as he watches her , doubts her ability . In a bayside town , two officials approach a building and knock on the door . The sound awakens who looks to the door with some confusion before a young boy comes down the stairs . Sophie feigns sleep again as the boy approaches and mentions the knock came from the door . The boy , ( : : ) , dons a magical disguise that makes him appear like an old man and answers the door after turning a color - coded knob . looks over curiously and is amazed to see that the door has opened to a new area . The officials at the door ask for the and inform that he 's been summoned to lend his magical assistance to the war effort . accepts the notice and shuts the door before addressing who 's giving fresh wood . She tells that allowed her inside but objects , saying she simply wandered in from the wastes . Markl wonders aloud if is a witch but a knock at the door draws his attention away . He opens it to help a young customer who asks if is a witch . responds that she 's the scariest witch of them all before the customer is sent off with her potion . tells not to lie to customers and , when she points out his own disguise , informs her that he needs to practice his magic . When another knock sounds on the door , opens the door to reveal the capital city of where another pair of officials requests the assistance of the . Amazed , tries the knob out for herself , finding that each color represents a different location . When she asks about a fourth , black setting on the wheel , says that only knows where it leads . begins to make breakfast for himself and notices a basket of eggs and bacon . She offers to make something for him but he explains that only obeys . However , manages to force into obedience by threatening to dump water on him or , worse , tell of their secret agreement . reluctantly agrees to obey and cook the food while , amazed at 's willpower , fetches a kettle to boil tea . The knob beside the door turns to the black setting and the handsome stranger met the day before walks in . is startled when addresses him as and tries to calmly continue cooking before introducing herself as his new cleaning lady , hired by . Howl gently pushes her aside and takes over the cooking , feeding the eggshells to . The three then sit down to eat and asks what she has in her pocket . She reaches in and is surprised to find a red note hidden there . She hands it to and , as it touches his fingers , the note bursts into flame and burns an inscription on the table from the of the . The encrypted message reads that 's heart will soon belong to her . Howl rubs the message off the table , looking pained as he does so , before feeding his breakfast and instructing him to heat hot water for his bath and move the castle further to the west . He then heads for the door , calling back to not to get too carried away cleaning , and leaves through the black portal . Markl questions if is working for the of the , but angrily denies it , her mouth abruptly sealing shut before she can utter a word about her curse , and promises to throttle the witch the next time she sees her . She orders to finish his breakfast and furiously begins cleaning . does his best to move extra things outside and warns customers to return later as there is a ' witch on the rampage inside ' . Having cleaned most of the room , goes to remove the ashes from the hearth while warns her that he may go out . She ignores his whining and moves the last bit of wood to hang over a pot with clinging to it , his round lower half dangling . As she takes the ashes outside , falls and smolders in the pot . When comes back inside she sees standing over the hearth , encouraging to reignite on new logs of wood . He calmly advises her not to torment his friend before leaving once again . goes upstairs to clean and tells to put away whatever he does n't want thrown out . After noticing the particularly dirty bathroom , sees the castle moving outside . She walks out onto a balcony , standing a bit straighter , and admires the high view of the countryside . She calls down to , complimenting him on his spark which pleases him greatly . joins outside and notices a long pole sticking out of one of the castles recesses . Recognizing it , pulls Turnip - head out of the hole . He regains his stance and bounces on the roof of the castle . asks if she is , indeed , a witch to which she responds that she 's the worst kind ; the kind that cleans . Later , sets the castle down by a mountain lake and and - head help string out the laundry . suggests that Turnip - head is a demon but says that , if that 's true , he must be a good demon since he led her here . She sits by the side of the lake and sighs to Markl that she 's never felt more at peace . Meanwhile , Howl flies in a bird - like form over a fiery landscape , watching as large airships drop bombs . A number of menacing winged creatures fly towards him but he swiftly eludes them and escapes through a break in the clouds , sealing it shut behind him . Back at the castle , the door opens and walks through , his wings drooping and his feathers scorched . He sits in the chair in front of 's hearth and , with difficulty , transforms back into his human self . warns him that , if he continues to transform , it will be harder to become human again but cheerfully shows Howl the extra firewood left for him . Howl admits that the war is getting worse and other wizards have been recruited to fight , most having gotten to the point where they ca n't remember being human . He asks to heat water for his bath and stops by a curtain drawn to the side of the room . He pulls it back to see sleeping in her youthful form and considers her a moment before going upstairs . The sound of the water running awakens , once again elderly . That day , and walk to the market to buy food . Near the harbor , a crowd of people suddenly comes together as a battle - ravaged ship arrives at port . urges to leave as she notices a shadow man scouring the crowd . An enemy airship flies overhead , dropping bombs into the harbor and sending leaflets of propaganda falling to the ground . and rush back to ' shop and shut the door . Suddenly , comes running down the stairs with a towel wrapped around his waist , howling and clutching his hair , turned from blonde to a vivid red . He yells at for getting carried away and ruining his bath potions . She defends herself , saying she merely moved things about but is inconsolable . He sits down and moans that he looks hideous , turning his hair black and saying that there 's no point to living if he ca n't be beautiful . The room begins to shake and shadows stretch . says that is summoning spirits of darkness and did this once when a girl dumped him . When tries to comfort him , 's body begins to excrete ooze . Nervous and growing upset , yells at him that she 's never felt beautiful in her life and runs outside into the where she begins to cry in the rain . Turnip - head approaches her with an umbrella which cheers her up and runs out to get her . goes back inside to find slumped over the hearth , his ooze threatening to extinguish , and tells a worried Markl that he 's just throwing a tantrum . helps him up and carts him upstairs where she instructs to clean him . Howl is put to bed and rests as comes in , offering him some warm milk , which he silently refuses . As she gets up to leave , asks her to stay . He explains that the of the is looking for him and admits that he 's a coward for hiding , which is what most of his magic is put towards . When inquires , says that , at one time , the was very beautiful and decided to pursue her only to find out that she really was n't . So he ran away . Sophie sighs in exasperation and says that he knows he ca n't hide for much longer now that both of his pseudonyms have been summoned to the palace to serve in the war effort . The oath he swore in the requires him to answer the summons . Howl claims that the war is folly and asserts that does n't understand how these people are despite her belief that the king should know what his subjects think . Suddenly , sits up and proposes that go to the palace in , pretending to be 's mother , and convince the king that is of no use to him . Sophie reluctantly agrees . She puts on her hat and uses his magic to bring some color back into her dress . Before she leaves , he gives her a ring to wear that he says will guarantee her safety and promises to follow her in disguise . Though is skeptical of the plan 's success , she tries to figure what kind of disguise may take as she walks towards the palace . She figures a pigeon or a crow would be too flamboyant but , as a small plane flies by with a young lady giggling beside her pilot , muses the pilot could be . As she continues , she 's soon accompanied by a small dog ( ) . She asks if it 's Howl and takes its weak bark as confirmation . As she approaches the steps to the palace , two shadow men carrying the of the ' sedan chair come up beside her . The peeks out and thanks for delivering her note and asks how is . replies curtly that has been a big baby since she started work for him , so she 's come to the palace to request another job . The brags that she 's been summoned for her skills in magic and is going to see ( : ) , the king 's sorcerer , who has finally seen what talent the has . asks , if the is so talented , why she does n't remove her curse . The responds that she only casts spells and can not break them , leaving irritated . As the shadow men approach the steps to the palace , they trigger a spell which renders them useless . A guard announces that the must continue on foot which she does with frustration . Sophie soon catches up to her but finds that she must carry the dog up the high stairs . Though struggling , she manages to pass the as she trundles upward , sweating profusely . makes it to the top and asks the why she does n't just give up , but the refuses saying that she 's waited 50 years for a summon since banished her to the . By the time the makes it up , she 's terribly disheveled and notes that she looks older . They walk into a lobby together , with the dog in , where a lone chair sits . The claims it and sits down , relieved , while is led into a side passage . Large bulbs around the lobby suddenly light up , casting long shadows on the , forming dark figures . The cries out as they move around her in a circle . The dog leads into a large greenhouse where she is introduced to , seated in a wheelchair . is surprised to see the dog lie beside and inquires about him . tells her his name is , her personal errand dog sent out to escort her . Sophie sighs heavily but keeps to the original story , claiming to be 's mother and explaining that he would be rather useless . is saddened by this news and says that was her last and brightest student until his heart was stolen by a demon . Since then , he 's been using his magic for purely selfish reasons and warns that , should he continue living as such , he will end up as the of the . Upon her cue , the is brought in on a dolly , reduced to her normal state as an old woman and deprived of magic . threatens to force 's magic from him if he refuses to honor the summon . stands and says that she understands now why refused to come ; 's summon was merely a trap to strip him of his powers . She asserts that may be selfish , but his intentions are pure and he only wants to be free . As she speaks , her appearance gradually fades back to her youthful look . smiles and says that is in love with . The statement causes to recoil and revert back into an old woman . The grabs 's dress , asking for and , though claims he 's not coming , says that he should , now that she knows his weakness . A propeller craft lands in the grass outside and a tall man climbs off and enters the greenhouse . addresses him as and introduces him to as 's mother . The declares to that he 's decided against using magic to win the war since 's powers shield the palace rather than protecting civilians ; a statement that ironically compliments . At the opposite end of the room , a second enters , shouting that he 's come up with a new battle strategy . When he sees his copy , the real King laughs and praises on her tricks before leaving . Still smiling , greets Howl who removes his disguise and grasps , saying that he 's fulfilled his oath and must be leaving . says she wo n't allow it and conjures a wave of water to flood the room . The group is transported to an empty realm where the earth appears miles below them . Howl tells not to look down as the clings to her dress . appears above them and tells she 's going to show her what truly is . Falling stars surround them and begin to encircle and , chanting . Howl is painfully forced to transform into his bird state and attempts to attack before stops him . raises her staff and throws it , but leaps up and breaks through the illusion out of the greenhouse . He drops down onto the propeller craft with and the lands in the back seat . Hin leaps onto the craft and puts himself in the 's lap as they fly off . Sophie sneers at but decides that they are now too high to dump him as gives her the controls to the aircraft . She struggles to maintain flight but soon gains a handle on it , despite nearly crashing . She asks why he bothered to make her go to the palace if he was going . He responds that he 's terrified of , but 's courage gave him the strength to face her . Seeing that they 're being followed by the 's men , tells he will give her five minutes of invisibility and that her ring will guide her back to the castle . All she needs to do is summon . He then separates from the aircraft on a copy to ward off their pursuers . At the palace , 's wards pull her staff from the chair where had been sitting and she exclaims that was the most fun she 's had in a while . She sends out troops to the shops of both and the but , when they break down the doors , they find empty buildings . Meanwhile , continues to fly in the rain . She passes over her hometown and navigates back into the mountain . The , holding onto , comments that he is a ' nice doggy ' but refuses to trust him . Up ahead , she sees the castle waiting for them but , unsure of how to land the craft , flies into the castle 's mouth where they crash . However , unharmed , they all climb out of the wreckage and greets . That night while everyone sleeps , enters the room , hunched over and semi - transparent . warns him that he 's gone too far before goes upstairs . Sophie wakes , somehow returned to her youth , and notices 's footprints on the floor surrounded by feathers . As she picks one up , it dissolves . Worried , she puts on a pair of boots and takes a candle . The footprints on the appear bloodied but follows them . She walks into 's room and finds that it has transformed into a vast tunnel , the walls glittering with his toys and adornments . She follows the tunnel until she comes upon Howl , breathing heavily and curled up in his bird - form . He tells her to go away but she refuses and tells him that she can help him break his curse . He says that she ca n't even break the one on her and tells him she loves him . Claiming she 's too late , stands , revealing a disfigured face full of sharp teeth and flies away , leaving calling for him , once again an old woman . Sophie suddenly awakens and hears the bath water running . She asks if is back and he replies that she needs to hurry to break their curse ; is getting worse . Frustrated , asks if is really a monster . ca n't answer any details but reveals that if he is extinguished , will die too . Later , and - head pitch in to help remove the propeller plane from the wall of the castle . Once the blockage is cleared , comes down the stairs , looking cheery . Upon seeing - head , he detects a strong spell on him too and says that it seems everyone in their growing family has problems . He draws a large chalk circle with magical symbols on the ground outside and instructs to move the castle over it . He then draws a smaller copy inside and takes off the hearth with a shovel . He stands over the circle and uses his demon powers to help Howl reconfigure the room . When all is done , shows the new additions including her own room which looks exactly like the one in her hometown above the hat shop . Outside their door is a courtyard that leads to a new flower shop that can manage . Seeing everything , she becomes youthful again and is touched by 's kindness ; though he merely wants everyone to live comfortably . He shows her a new doorway on the color turn - knob that leads to a field covered in flowers . A lone cottage stands near a stream and explains that it used to belong to his uncle , a powerful wizard , who gave it to him so that he could study sorcery in peace . Now , he 's giving it to . Fearful that he is leaving , begs him to stay and says that she wants to help him , even if she 's not talented or pretty . When assures her that she 's beautiful , she becomes old again . Suddenly , a large warship passes over them . Angered by its presence , Howl lightly gestures and causes the ship to malfunction . This display of magic causes his arm to painfully transform and feather , though Howl tries to hide it . When the airship yields flying creatures , grabs and sprouts wings , carrying her back to the door to the castle . He drops her inside and flies away . and find on the stairway by the door exclaiming that she 's too old for these shenanigans . That night , before bed , tells not to worry about ; he 's often away for days at a time , as puts the to bed . Before she can leave , the tells she knows she 's in love and her sighing has given her away . asks the if she has ever fallen in love , to which the gleefully replies that she still is and simply ca n't ignore the hearts of handsome young men . An air raid siren sounds outside and the warns not to go out ; henchmen are no doubt looking for the house although keeps the place well hidden . The next day , after returning from market , rushes into the courtyard and tells that a strange woman has followed him inside . looks up to see her mother who rushes forward in tears , crying that she 's been looking everywhere for her . invites her in and her mother reveals that she 's gotten married again . She sets a small bag on a table that the , sitting nearby , quickly notices . When and her mother go into the courtyard again , the takes the bag and grabs a peeping bug that must have stored in there to spy on . She feeds it to who belches sickly . The finds a cigar within the bag and begins to smoke it , much to 's disgust . 's mother invites her to live with her but politely refuses , claiming to be happy where she is . She says farewell to her mother who leaves with a chauffeur . As they drive off , she tells the driver that she did as she was told and must now return to her husband . She whispers for to forgive her . goes back into the castle where tells her that he loves her and does n't want her to leave . Sophie assures him that she will stay ; they are a family . That evening , attempts to reignite who has weakened due to the cigar smoke . goes to open a window but the warns against it , saying that there 's an air raid and is too weak to properly protect the house . As goes to pull back from the window , a series of bombs hits the side streets , sending a tremor through the house . runs outside to see most of the street enveloped in flames and a horde of 's blob men approaching her . She runs back to the courtyard and looks up in time to see a bomb plummeting towards her , with holding onto it . The bomb hits the center of the courtyard but fails to explode . Sophie runs to who apologizes for not arriving sooner and escorts back into the house . Howl calls up , coughing back to life , and takes the cigar from the who says that she needs to have a chat at some point with . He tells to wait at the house while he goes to deflect the second wave of bombs but she begs him to stay . He tells her he 's tired of running and now has something that he wants to protect ( ) before flying out the door and into the ember filled sky . Sophie retreats inside from the shadow blobs and changes the knob beside the door to return to the . She then goes outside to watch the battle and sees attacking an airship , now more monstrous than human . She watches in horror as the ship goes down and explodes in a fireball . Sophie demands that do something , but he ca n't change the portals without 's help . begs him to try so that wo n't have a reason to fight for the shop and states that their vulnerability wo n't change no matter where they are . They come up with an idea . and - head help the leave the house and places on a shovel . She backs out of the house with him and watches as the entire castle falls apart . They all go back inside and puts on the hearth , ordering him to move what little is left of the castle closer to so they can help him . However , he is too weak and asks to give him something of hers . She offers him her long braid and he eats it , gaining strength enough to put together a wobbly , smaller version of the castle . commends his powers and quips her on what he could have done with her eyes or her heart . At this , the suddenly realizes that has 's heart . Blindly motivated by her crush , she takes off the hearth and holds the heart close to her . The castle shakes and stumbles and the is set on fire , crying out in the heat . yells out as his powers are stripped and tries to take him from the but she refuses to let go . In her panic , throws water over them which extinguishes the fire . Then , the section of is standing on breaks away from the rest . Hin leaps into her arms as they fall into a deep chasm , calling after her while the castle continues on its way across the mountains . Sophie wakes up , having survived the wreck , and is approached by . She bursts out crying , wondering if she killed by pouring water over . She buries her face in her hands as the ring gave her begins to tremble , a single beam of light shining from it . asks the ring if is still alive and it points to the main door that had fallen away , propped against a wall of dirt . She opens it , finding a looming darkness ahead and walks through , following . finds herself in 's cottage and walks outside to the fields where she sees a young boy watching a shower of falling stars ; each one perishing as it lands . Realizing the doorway was a portal to 's childhood , runs towards the young and watches as he catches a star , speak to it , and swallow it . He coughs and brings forth from his chest a beating flame ; . The ring on 's finger breaks and is plunged into a deep darkness , but manages to shout out to , telling him that she can help him and to find her in the future . and make it back through the doorway where they find waiting for her , nearly a complete form of a monstrous bird . approaches him , brushes the feathers from his face and kisses him , apologizing for taking so long . She asks him to take them to and , as she stands on his clawed foot , takes off . They arrive at the walking castle where , the , and Turnip - head are waiting ; the castle having been reduced to two walking legs supporting a single piece of floor . As soon as they arrive , Howl collapses and the feathers disintegrate to reveal his human body . Sophie props him up before going to the and begging her to release . Though she refuses at first , with 's plea , she finally relinquishes him to her . tells he 's very tired but may be all right if is the one to give Howl his heart back . She presses him into 's chest . A light bursts from it and , once again a star , flies off shouting that he 's free . With gone , the castle stops moving and begins to tip over . The legs fall apart and the flooring slides quickly down the mountainside . Turnip - head leaps ahead of the floorboard and uses his pole to slow it down , but splinters and grinds it down to near nothing . The floorboard finally stops , propped between two rocks . Proud by his sacrifice , kisses Turnip - head which suddenly causes him to vibrate and transform into a human . He bows to and proclaims that he 's the prince ( : Japanese : ) from the neighboring country who had gone missing . A spell had turned him into a scarecrow and a kiss from his true love was the only thing that could break it . The compliments the handsome young man as awakens and complains of a weight on his chest . tells him that a heart is a heavy burden and , when he looks at her and likens her hair to starlight , hugs him fiercely . The tells the prince that , though his love is in love with someone else , he should still go home and put an end to the war . He agrees to do this , saying that even hearts can change , and the suggests that she 'll be waiting for him should he return . As the prince leaves , sends a visual message to who asks him where he 's been . As he shows her , she begrudgingly calls him a traitor and watches as he rejoins and . She admits that her fun is at an end and decides to finally put a stop to the war . returns to and ignites into a flame , telling her that he 's missed them . Sophie kisses him as well and creates a new , flying home for them all to live in . The sits in the courtyard while and play and and stand together at the bow of the castle and share a tender > 

 < synopsis > drives down near her town as she passes by three vacant billboards . She goes to an advertising agency to speak to about putting up three billboards for a year . Red determines is the mother of , who was raped and murdered seven months earlier . is driving down when he sees two young men putting up the first billboard that reads " How come , ? " He talks to a guy named , who is n't fond of due to his reputation of harassing African - American citizens . passes the second billboard that says " And still no arrests ? " He goes to read the last billboard ( technically first to read ) , which says " Raped while dying " . calls as he 's having dinner with his wife and daughters and to inform him about the billboards . The billboards receive widespread notoriety across town for the imagery people get from reading it , as well as what people believe to be a personal attack against . 's son is still traumatized by his sister 's horrific death , and the billboards only make him more upset . even goes on live TV during a broadcast to explain her reasoning for putting up the billboards . She is essentially challenging the , especially , into doing their jobs instead of exercising force against minorities . is at a pool hall where a drunk is trying to get in 's face for allowing the billboards to go up . As tries to antagonize , she is defended by a local car dealer named , who tells her she looked good on TV.Mildred goes home to find sitting at the table with . He tells that told him how other kids at school are giving him problems for the billboards . As tries to lecture , she brings up a point over some ads that ran a while back about people who were culpable by association with gangs if their friends did anything wrong , which she compares to people from church being culpable when one of them goes around sexually harassing young boys . meets with outside of town where they can overlook the billboards . He understands 's grief and anger , but also mentions to her that he is dying of pancreatic cancer . already knows , as does most of the town . After two people issue complaints over the billboards , visits one of them , a dentist named . She grabs the drill from his hand and runs it through 's thumb . Willoughby goes to the shop where works and brings her in for questioning after the incident . During her interrogation , accidentally coughs blood in 's face . She runs to get help and he is taken to the hospital . While looking in 's old room , has a flashback to the last time she saw her . They were arguing over going out , and said she hoped she would get raped on the way , and agreed with her . The thought fills her with much regret . 's abusive ex - husband comes to 's house with his air - headed younger girlfriend . gets into a confrontation with over the billboards for letting others know exactly what happened to . He pushes against a wall while holds a knife to his throat . After lets go , he tells her that had wanted to move in with him , and says she would still be alive if she did so . implies that knew . When asks , just says he does n't know . goes to the ad agency over the rent for the billboards , when 's secretary brings in an envelope and note with the rent for keeping up the billboards a little longer . The donor of the money is kept anonymous . takes his family out to the lake so he can teach his daughters how to fish . Later that night , he makes love to . As she falls asleep , goes out by the stable and puts a bag over his head before he shoots himself in the head . hears the gunshot and finds a note on the table written by , and she breaks down crying when she realizes what has happened . His note to her explains that he could n't bear to watch her and the girls suffer as his health continues to deteriorate , and he could n't stand the physical pain he would endure from the cancer . Everyone at the police department is devastated over what happened to . in particular is so overcome with grief that he walks across the street to the ad agency to physically attack , even throwing him out the window ( but not killing him ) . even punches in the face on the way out , just as the new chief , is walking by . The news of 's suicide is featured on the news . When it is suggested that 's billboards may have had something to do with it , she gets even more hatred from the residents in . While dropping off at school , a student throws a can at her car . She gets out to confront the kid and kicks him in the nuts , along with a friend of his . A man enters 's shop and throws a glass figurine at her . He suggests that he was a friend of 's or possibly the man that killed , but then he denies all of that and leaves , simply trying to scare . enters moments later with a note that left for . She reads it and learns that he was the one that paid the rent money for the billboards to keep drama going after his death . At the station , enters and announces that he is 's replacement . Dixon insults and is promptly fired . is driving home with at night when they see the billboards are all on fire . grabs an extinguisher while drives home for another . They put out the fires but the messages are destroyed . is called by the desk sergeant at the station to go pick up a note left for him . He goes at night when is n't there , while sneaks into the ad agency after believing that set fire to her billboards . finds the note , another written by . It says that knew wanted to become a detective and he believed that has what it takes to do so , but he needs to be more loving and compassionate to do so . then starts hurling cocktails at the station . gets out of the burning building while saving 's case file , but he gets badly burnt . runs out as shows up to put out the fire on 's body . After the authorities show up , provides with an alibi saying she was with him . Grateful , she agrees to go to dinner with him . is brought to the hospital for his burn wounds , and is placed in the same room as . The former policeman gives a tearful apology , and after a few moments of anger , lets it go and forgives his attacker . is visited by , who has received duplicates of the billboards after the fire . He , , and 's coworker help put them back up . mostly recovers from his wounds and is at the bar . The man that threatened at her store enters with a buddy . He starts bragging about raping a girl seven months earlier , which overhears and believes he is talking about , especially since the guy mentions dousing her with gas , and 's body was burnt . approaches the guy and pretends to do a magic trick , but he just scratches the guy 's cheek , leading him to start beating the crap out of until his buddy talks him down . goes home and takes a piece of skin from under his fingernail to send in as a DNA sample . is at dinner with when and walk in . approaches and admits he set the billboards on fire while drunk and angry , but he was convinced by that " anger only begets more anger " . After a while , figures is uncomfortable with their date because is a small person , and he leaves after paying . walks over to and 's table with a wine bottle as if to use it on them , but she instead sets it down and tells to be good to . contacts Mildred with the news that he may have found 's killer . However , after the results come back , meets with to find out that the man was not 's killer , as he was stationed in the around the time of her murder , and the DNA samples do n't match . calls again to tell her the news , both of them extremely disappointed with the results . He does note that the man is still a rapist , and got his license plate number . Mildred and head off to where the man lives to take matters into their own hands . On the drive there , admits she set fire to the police station . already knew since , " Who else could it be ? " The two of them then contemplate the decision of killing the man when they see him , but they figure they 'll decide once they get there.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > In the middle of , two prisoners of war are burying a corpse in the graveyard of a Japanese POW camp in southern . One , ( ) , is revealed to routinely bribe guards to ensure he is put on the sick list , which allows him to avoid hard labour . A large contingent of British prisoners under the leadership of ( ) arrives , defiantly whistling the as they march in . Because they were ordered by their superiors to surrender , states that they should be obedient and cooperative prisoners . The Japanese camp commander , ( ) , addresses them , informing them of his rules . He insists that all prisoners , regardless of rank , will work on the construction of a bridge over the as part of a railroad that will link all . The next morning , when orders everyone , including officers , to work , commands his officers to stand fast . He points out that the state that captured officers are exempt from manual labour . is infuriated and backhands in the face , but the latter refuses to back down , even after has a machine gun set up threatening to shoot all the officers . is dissuaded from shooting by ( ) , a British medical officer prisoner , citing an inquiry and scandal should carry through with the murder of officers . Instead , the Japanese commander leaves and his officers standing in the intense heat . As the day wears on , one of them collapses from heat stroke , but and the rest are still standing defiantly at attention when the prisoners return from the day 's work . After is beaten in 's quarters , the British officers are sent into a punishment cage and into his own box for solitary confinement . When requests to be allowed to check the officers , agrees on the condition that persuade to change his mind . , however , refuses to budge , saying " if we give in now there 'll be no end to it . " In the meantime , construction of the railroad bridge falls far behind schedule , due in part to many " accidents " purposely arranged by the British prisoners . has a deadline ; if he should fail to meet it , it would bring him great shame and oblige him to commit seppuku ( ritual suicide ) . reluctantly releases , telling him that he has proclaimed an " amnesty " to commemorate the anniversary of 's great victory in the - , using it as an excuse to exempt the officers from work . Upon their release , and his officers proudly walk through a jubilant reception . for his part breaks down in tears in private . Having recovered from his ordeal physically , but not mentally broken , sets off on an inspection of the bridge and is shocked to find disorganization , shirking and outright sabotage on the construction site . He decides that he will build a better bridge than the Japanese soldiers . He orders ( ) and ( ) to come up with designs for a proper bridge , despite its military value to the . He wants to demonstrate to his captors what he considers superior British ingenuity and to also keep his men busy , which he feels would be better for morale than sitting around doing nothing in prison . Meanwhile , three men , one of them the , attempt to escape . Two are killed ; is shot , falls into the river and is swept downstream . After many days in the jungle , he stumbles into a Siamese village , whose residents help him recover and get back to safety . He 's given food , water and an outrigger boat to make his way down the river . Shears runs out of water during the trip and is forced to drink the water from the river , which makes him ill . However , he makes it to the mouth of the river and is picked up by British forces and shipped to a British hospital in , ( at the time , ) . While recuperating , he dallies with a lovely nurse ( ( ) , a member of the , asks to speak with him . He informs that he is leading a small group of commandos on a mission to destroy the bridge . He asks to volunteer , since he knows the area . refuses , finally admitting that he is not at all , but a enlisted man . Shears recounts that he and a survived the sinking of their ship , but the was subsequently killed by a Japanese patrol . " " switched dog tags with the dead officer , hoping to get preferential treatment in captivity . It did n't work , but then he had no choice but to continue the impersonation . tells him that the military already knew about it . To avoid bad publicity , the loans him to the . offers him a deal : in exchange for his services , he will be given the " simulated rank " of major on the mission and avoid being charged with impersonating an officer , an offense punishable by death . Thus , reluctantly " volunteers " with the understanding that should he survive , he 'll get to keep his officer status . They are to be joined by ( ) , a young eager officer with no combat experience who insists that he wo n't fold under pressure should he have to kill someone on the mission , and a fourth officer . Back in the camp , explains to the through engineering principles that they 've selected a poor site for the bridge . Finally convinced , the original bridge is abandoned and construction of a whole new bridge is commenced 400 yards downriver . watches in bewilderment as maniacally drives his men to complete the project by the deadline . Ironically , he even volunteers his junior officers to assist with the physical labor , something he had refused to consider earlier in the standoff with - provided that the Japanese officers are willing to pitch in as well . Meanwhile , the commandos parachute in . The fourth officer dies due to a bad landing . The rest make their way to the river , assisted by native Burmese women porters and their village chief , ( ) . The commandos come upon a Japanese patrol whom they try to kill without firing shots , but freezes when confronted by one in the jungle . jumps in front of him and kills the Japanese soldier , but gets shot in the foot as a consequence . This slows him down , but refuses to leave him behind and the trio make their way to the bridge with the Burmese helpers . As the prison camp celebrates the completion of the bridge on time with a party for all , and wire explosives to it under cover of darkness . The next day , a Japanese train full of soldiers and important officials is scheduled to be the first to use the bridge ; wants to blow it up just as the train passes over , accomplishing two missions at once . As dawn approaches , the trio notice with horror that the river has receded and the wires and explosives that were hidden the night before are now exposed . proudly walks up and down his bridge making a final inspection , and notices the wires . The train can be heard approaching . and frantically hurry down to the riverbank , pulling up and following the wire towards who is waiting by the detonator . When they get too close , breaks cover and stabs to death . yells for help and then tries to stop ( who can not bring himself to kill ) from getting to the detonator . A firefight erupts as fires upon the approaching Japanese soldiers ; is killed in the gunfight . When is hit , swims across the river to finish the job , but he too is shot just before he reaches . Recognizing , suddenly comes to his senses and exclaims , " What have I done ? " desperately turns the mortar fire in their direction , killing in the blast and mortally wounding . The colonel stumbles over to the detonator plunger and falls on it with his dying breath , just in time to blow up the bridge and send the train hurtling into the river . , feeling guilty for killing and in the face of shocked stares from the Burmese women , pleads , " I had to do it ! They might have been taken alive ! It was the only thing to do ! " Meanwhile , , the British medical officer who has witnessed all the carnage unfold from his vantage point on the hill , shakes his head incredulously , " ! ... Madness!".</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > Set in , the film begins with 's ( ) narration as he and his friend , ( ) sprint down , pursued by security guards . states that unlike people who ' choose life ' ( traditional families , materialistic possessions and financial stability ) , he decided live life as a heroin addict . The rest of 's close circle of football enthusiast friends are introduced : con - artist ( ) , clean - cut athlete ( ) and sociopath , ( ) , whom along with , has decided not to do heroin and criticizes his friends regularly for their lifestyle choice . , and are all heroin addicts who spend their days shooting up in their drug dealer , 's ( ) flat . Swanney is often referred to as " The " by the guys . One day , decides to give up heroin . He decides to employ 's method of locking himself in a cheap rented room with enough food , equipment and supplies to endure the withdrawal . Realizing he needs one last high to get him through the night , he breaks himself out of his room and buys opium rectal suppositories from dealer , ( ) . After this final hit ( and a nasty spell of diarrhea ) , returns to the cheap room to finish the process . He later goes to a nightclub with the gang , noticing that his sex drive has returned with a vengeance . He eventually leaves with a young woman named ( ) . After having sex together , Diane refuses to sleep in the same room as and forces him to sleep in the hallway on a sofa . In the morning , realizes that is in fact a 15 year old schoolgirl and the flatmates sitting around the breakfast table are in fact , her parents . Horrified , tries to shake off the incident but remains friends with , who threatens to tell the police that had sex with her despite being underage . is dumped by his girlfriend ( ) after a string of events unintentionally initially started by . had borrowed a sex tape of & , without their consent , hiding it in the box of a football tape . angrily believes that had mistakenly returned the tape to the video store . gets , and to join him on a walk in the highlands at the end of a train line but the guys are reluctant , believing they 're being punished by for the hard time he 's receiving from . tries to convince them that they 'll be getting fresh air and seeing the great outdoors of their country but retorts , saying that Scottish culture is highly unappreciated by the rest of the world . At that point , , and decide to use heroin again and a broken - hearted asks to try it to see why they like it so much , despite 's reluctance . One day during a heroin - induced stupor , the gang are interrupted by ( a fellow heroin addict ) who is screaming hysterically because her infant child , has died from neglect . All are shell - shocked , especially who is implied to be the baby 's father . Something crashes in and he becomes more nihilistic than ever , living only to feed his and his friends ' addiction . and are later caught stealing from a book shop and are pursued by security guards , as seen in the beginning of the film . alludes the police despite the theft being his idea . Due to prior convictions , is sent to prison whereas is put on a and given methadone . Despite support from friends and family , becomes increasingly bored and depressed and escapes to 's flat where he takes a particularly strong hit and nearly dies . At a local emergency room , is brought out of his trip and his parents pick him up . Determined to make him kick , they lock him in his room so he can beat his addiction . As lies in bed going through severe withdrawal symptoms , he hallucinates that is singing to him , friends are giving him advice and 's dead baby is crawling on the ceiling . The hallucination sequence is intercut with weird , imagined scenes from a TV game show , with asking 's parents questions about . is finally woken from his nightmares and is told by his parents that he needs to get tested . Despite years of sharing syringes with other drug addicts , 's test comes back negative . Clean of heroin , decides to visit who , by now , is lost in his heroin addiction and has contracted . He 's living in a filthy flat , with on the door proclaiming he has . gives a little money to get by . On 's advice , moves to and gets a job as a property letting agent . He begins enjoying his new life of sobriety but it 's short - lived after 's involved in an armed robbery . He turns up at 's flat , using it to hide out , disrupting 's life with his freeloading and slovenly ways . One day has lay a bet on a horse race and it hits , coming in with enough money for them to enjoy a brief period of revelry . At the dance club they go to , finds a woman whom he tries to have sex with , only to find that the person is a transvestite . He angrily tells that he 's not gay and attacks when he suggests it could have turned into a beautiful night for . , who now sees himself as a well - connected pimp and drug pusher , also shows up on 's doorstep . 's ' friends ' make his life more miserable , stealing from him and trashing his flat . Sick steals and sells 's television , despite the fact that it was a rental and then has the temerity to ask if he wants to sell his passport . takes his passport and stores it in a train station locker . Seeking to rid himself of them , gives them a flat he 's responsible for , however , does n't charge them rent to live there . Their squatting is discovered when 's boss finds a couple willing to live there . However , at this point the three have to return to when they learn has died due to toxoplasmosis . Back home , they meet who 's been released from prison . suggests a risky but profitable heroin transaction via . needs 's help to foot half of the initial  4,000 to buy the supply . After the purchase , reluctantly checks the purity by injecting himself and declaring it to be high quality . The four then travel back to to sell the drugs to a dealer . On the bus down , is extremely nervous and uptight since the police are still searching for him . promises himself one final hit before they reach and ponders if he 'll become addicted again . The meet the dealer in a hotel room and after a purity check and a bit of haggling , they agree on  16,000 . They all go to a pub to celebrate , all of them friendlier and happier than they usually are , and discuss their plans to spend their share of the money . suggests to Spud that they steal the money and run as & get drinks in . is too scared of to consider it . believes that neither nor Boy deserve the money . As heads back to the table with another round of pints he bumps into another patron and spills much of the beer he bought . When the man apologizes , turns violent and smashes the man 's face with one of the glasses . As he moves in to cut the man with a knife , he slashes 's hand . becomes more ominously sociopathic and demands that light a cigarette for him . Realizing that he 's probably matured more than his friends and , with the exception of , they 're more of a danger to him now , decides to leave them while taking the money . Early in the morning , wakes up before anyone else and takes the money from , leaving quietly . Spud sees him leave but says nothing ; gives him an affirmative nod . After discovers the money has gone , he trashes the hotel room in a violent rage that alerts the police , presumably leading to his arrest . walks out into and vows to live the traditional , stable life he talked about in the beginning of the film . In voiceover , he talks about how has become too dangerous and that would have stolen the money from everyone if he 'd thought to do it first . He does feel some remorse for leaving behind and leaves him  2,000 in the locker where he 'd been hiding his passport . In the final scene , retrieves the money left for him.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) and his son are hunting deer ; drops a buck as recites the 's , then smiles approvingly at the teen . On the drive home , tells his son to always " be ready . old drives past the house . Later they talk about the family finances ; wonders why they do n't rent out the grandfather 's old apartment , says it is in too poor condition . The family , , his wife , son and daughter walk to a neighbor 's house for dinner with their friends the . The families have a good time together . While the adults cook the kids go out , jumps on the old parked by the curb ; they realize someone is inside and return to the house . ( ) is an affable man and plays a lousy trumpet . After dinner , the younger6 - year old daughters leave to go back to 's house to get her safety whistle she is supposed to carry at all times . Sometime later realizes the girls have n't returned and that the teens had n't escorted the two young ones . searches his own home to no avail . Ralph returns from looking also and mentions the from earlier . ( ) has Chinese food alone and chats with the waitress . His phone buzzes . After a police hunt , the white is found parked outside a gas station next to a wooded area . When . , who heads the case , goes to confront the 's driver , ( ) , panics , tries to speed away but crashes into the trees . is taken in for questioning , but it is found that he has the IQ of a 10 - year - old and rarely speaks . goes to see 's aunt , ( ) , who raised him with his uncle after his parents died when he was six . 's uncle left home a couple of years ago after a domestic dispute with his aunt . spends most nights sleeping in the RV and does not have many things . The shows no forensic evidence indicating the girls were forcibly taken into or struggled inside the , and 's low intelligence means he could n't have covered up such evidence . At night many volunteers search the woods calling for the girls . comes to the house and gets better photos of their daughter . At the , tells they passed the lie detector tests they did , he asks if there was a reason the girls ran away . Grace is weepy and says the girls were happy , vows to find the girl . He greets , who seems sure it must be the driver . tells the the evidence against is weak and tries to calm him down . The polygraph tests of him prove inconclusive due to his low IQ , and he repeatedly denies ever having seen the children . As the police are unable to find evidence against , he will be released in two days . asks his to hold longer , but the senior refuses . updates him on the search . interviews sex offenders within a 10 - mile radius of the girls ' homes . discovers that a has a bound and mummified body in a barricaded basement . The body is wearing a circular medallion with a maze - like design . claims that he did not know who the man was , but that in confession the man talked about killing sixteen children and also admitted to having a marital dispute . confesses that he convinced the man to come to his house , where he killed him " to save the children " and is arrested for murder . The search of the woods and river continues . has found out when is being released and attacks him in the police parking lot . He hears say " They did n't cry until I left them . " Though no one is close enough to hear this to corroborate , takes this as proof that took the girls . lets off with a warning and sends him home after a brief talk with . At the house , interviews and again about the parking lot incident . He threatens to send the aunt to jail if is not honest . He then leaves and stands in front of an old car . Grace is distraught , gives her a sedative to help her sleep . He tells his son to be brave and grownup and look after his mother , then leaves the house . That night , abducts at gunpoint while walking his dog , and imprisons him in his father 's old abandoned , run - down apartment house . The next morning He shows , the captured man bound with duct tape ; is horrified as starts questioning . researches past unsolved missing children 's cases . One is , a boy missing since age 6 , 26 years ago . An interview with his mother shows her playing and replaying a tape of him just before his abduction . He interviews again , in custody . says the man abducted kids in daylight and took more than one at a time . feels the info is useless . The body is not identified by DNA or missing persons ' reports . repeatedly beats for information , enraged that the man wo n't say what he did with the girls . During a candlelight vigil for the missing girls , notices a man acting suspicious but loses him in a chase . That evening watches the news item on TV about the man , they show a sketch and the next day he goes to see and tell him there is another possible man . and his boss , argues about resources for the continuing hunt . watches the video of ' interview ; he gets a phone call tip . A discount store clerk recognizes him and states that he comes in from time to time to examine children 's mannequins and buy children 's clothing . She promises to contact if he comes to the store again . is overcome with guilt and tells his wife ( ) what they have done and brings her to see . brings her to the apartment where is brutally beaten , bloody and tied to the bathroom floor . Shocked , she unties and tries to talk to him nicely , but he attempts to escape . grabs him . Tied again , watches as starts building something from plywood . Later , then brings the back to the apartment . has built an enclosure around the bathtub in which he nails . It is devoid of light except for a small tube talk - hole . says otherwise he would kill the man , and challenges the to let him go . says it has to stop but does nothing when tells him to think of . While the teen daughter is in the bath , the strange man walks silently in their house . Later the hooded man enters the house , hears something and jumps out of bed . She finds an open window and believes had come back . arrives writes down her statement of someone coming in through the window . Grace shows him the basement , well - organized workshop . sees a bag of lye and asks where is ; she says he is out looking for their daughter . In the pouring rain , follows but is " made , " turns back from the apartment and goes to a nearby liquor store instead . wonders what he was doing in the area . Dover approaches with a bottle and asks why he is being followed . He says this is first drink in nine years . urges to take care of himself and his wife . It has been six days , gets very angry , but then goes home to sleep . He dreams he sees . works at his computer . He reads an old news archive of a suicide , which occurred at 234 , the same location was near . The next day tortures with alternating scalding and freezing water from the shower - head . tries to talk , but just wants to hear where the girls are . kneels to pray . arrives at the boarded - up building and enters the ground floor . He finds pretending to sleep on the floor . gives the policeman a short tour of the ramshackle building , and then his cell phone rings with the store clerk , the intruder has been spotted . The clerk tells the license plate number , and he leaves quickly . confronts at his home , notices he is strange and forcibly handcuffs him . He calls it in and searches the house . The walls are covered in drawings of intricate mazes . In a back room , locked boxes are filled with maze books , venomous snakes , and bloody children 's clothing . At the police station , both the and identify clothing belonging to their children from the crates , and confesses to killing them . is weeping while handcuffed in the interrogation room and draws a maze . watches for a while then enters . He loses control and beats during questioning , and other cops rush in . manages to grab one of the officers ' gun from his belt and commits suicide . Back at the apartment prison sits and recites the 's . At the police station , the chides for the death . is drinking as finally talks and mentions something about finding the girls in a maze . goes to the home to " apologize " to for attacking at the police station . She invites him in and tells her son died of cancer and commiserated . says he dreams of in a maze . also mentions her husband kept snakes . A newspaper headline grabs 's attention , the report of 's suicide . tries to tell to get over it , you ca n't win them all and to find a girlfriend . goes to his workstation in a rage . In a pile of photos , he notices a picture of a maze similar to the one was drawing . Back at 's house , another cop reveals the blood on the children 's clothes is later found to be pig 's blood . is now felt to be a fake killer copying a book titled " The " which prominently features mazes , especially a circular maze ( seen in the " O " in the " " logo and as the maze medallion worn by the body in 's basement ) which was drawing while in custody . ca n't figure out how had the missing girl 's clothes . He returns to the 's house and finds a small sock in the bushes . Someone calls , and she excitedly finds . has been found wandering , drugged and is hospitalized . tries to question the young girl . remains missing . In her drugged state , rambles that was there , giving the people around her the impression that is somehow in on it . rushes off as chases him in the hospital , then to a car chase outside . loses , but heads towards 's apartment building and discovers the imprisoned . has gone to 's , with a tool belt and offering to do some penance for his behavior . Holly once again is friendly and invites him in for a tea . confronts her about the girls , but the woman holds him at gunpoint and forces him to put on handcuffs and consume the same sedative used to drug and . At gunpoint , she directs him to an old car outside . She reveals that she and her husband had been religious people , like , until their son died of cancer at a young age . and her husband decided to make war on by making children disappear without a trace to turn their parents into demons , as evidenced by what had become . Her husband then disappeared and she " does what she can . " She orders to drive slowly and tells him never touched the girls . The car had been covering a pit , tries to force him in and shoots him in the leg , he drops into the hole . She closes the lid and parks the car again over the lid . The tells to go to 's and let her know about . With a small flashlight , explores his dungeon . He finds his daughter 's whistle and prays for 's safety . arrives . goes to a locked room to get . enters the house and sees an old photo of 's husband and the . He then creeps toward a noise . is injecting the girl with a syringe , and demands she stop , they both fire their weapons . is killed , and a wounded , bloody races the girl to the hospital . The next morning a bandaged reads a newspaper , the headline says , aka , has been reunited with his family . Grace comes in and says will be okay , the and leave . Grace says still has n't contacted her ; she realizes will be going to jail when caught . At night , at the house , the techs say they have found some dead snakes , but the ground is frozen . They leave for the night . stays behind for a while then hears a whistle.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) , exits a church . He starts up his old and drives home , listening to an audiotape of . He arrives home to find his estranged teenage son ( ) sitting on the stoop drinking a bottle of whiskey and popping pills . Visibly inebriated , offers a drink , which refuses and invites his son in for a cup of coffee instead . Inside shares little concerning his whereabouts over the last few years and instead spends his time teasing his reformed alcoholic father before passing out in his easy chair . ( ) lives in suburban with his " ideal " family , but he and his wife Tess ( ) lament their economic hardships . works full time as a high school physics teacher , and Tess works two jobs just to stay afloat . Brendan visits the local credit union to discuss refinancing options with the bank manager , but learns that he is underwater in his mortgage and will lose his home within a month . tells Tess that he 'll spend his nights bouncing at a strip club a couple of towns over to make extra money . makes his way through and comes to an old gym that he frequented as a kid . He signs up for a monthly membership and begins to train again , while watching professional fighter Pete " " ( ) , who easily knocks out numerous sparring partners . Grimes ' manager puts out the word that any fighter willing to practice against will get $ 200 on the spot . accepts the offer , but is brushed off by and his manager . persists and is eventually allowed into the ring . Mad dances across the mat , takes the first swing , and is instantly knocked out by with a swift rush of crushing blows . tells 's manager that he 'll be expecting that $ 200 . Unbeknownst to , the sparring session had already been recorded and uploaded to . wraps up his teaching job in the early afternoon , calls his wife , and tells her that he 'll be heading to his bouncing job and to say goodnight to his daughters . He pulls up outside a strip club where a makeshift boxing ring is set up in the parking lot . lied to Tess . He enters the ring and squeaks out a win over his opponent . Later that evening he arrives home and awakens , who is shocked to see his right eye swollen and bruised . She asks why he lied , and he admits that the house will be foreclosed on and that amateur fights pay more in one night than bouncing does in a month . She pleads with him to stop . Mad 's manager knocks on 's front door and tells that gave him this address when he signed up for his gym membership and that he would like to train and manage . rejects the offer , citing that does n't live there , but he agrees tp pass the offer along to him . The next day eats lunch at a local diner and is surprised when walks in . wants to train him , as he did when he was a teenager . explains that this is n't meant to be a bonding moment for the two of them ; will act as his trainer , and not his father . accepts the proposal under multiple conditions . He tells to empty the prescription pill bottles from his pockets , to lay off , coffee , and junk food . reluctantly accepts the conditions . goes to work the following day , his shiner in full - view , and catches gawking looks of students and teachers . In class , one of his students comments that his brother saw him win his fight in the strip club parking lot , and wonders if it 's true . Before replies , the school principal ( ) peeks his head into the classroom and tells to meet him in his office . tells that he ca n't fight in a strip club parking lot and work full time at the school . is placed on suspension without pay for the duration of the semester . Without pay , decides that the only way to make house payments is to show up at more parking lot fights . Tess reluctantly caves to 's decision . goes to meet his old fighting coach , ( ) , who is currently grooming an up - and - coming fighter for the tournament in . pleads for training from . caves and allows to train with his team . 's unorthodox training methods prove to work well for , who quickly regains his strength and agility . arrives home one night and is surprised to see parked in front of his house . asks if he can see his granddaughters , but only sees a drunk and dismisses him . lets slip that he 's 1,000 days sober and that is training with him . This surprises because hated even more than he did , and chose to leave with their mom while stayed behind to marry Tess . tells to leave . At the peak of his training , 's contender suffers a crippling injury , leaving him without a fighter for . Brendan convinces to put his trust in him and to allow him to fight in the tournament , which carries a $ 5,000,000 prize . The clip of 's beating has swept across the Internet . In , a trio of soldiers watches it on a laptop . One of the soldiers recognizes 's face and hurriedly returns to his tent , where he searches his bag for a helmet - cam videotape . He watches the videotape , in which half a dozen soldiers flee from a sinking tank after being rescued by . saved the unit . Shortly thereafter calls a woman in , . In her home , numerous framed portraits of a Latino man in uniform adorn the walls ; in one photo , , also in uniform , stands next to the , smiling . knows the woman and her children , and she knows him . They both speak of the deceased : 's best friend and the closest thing he ever had to a brother . Both and arrive at : with his father , and with . For the first day , all the tournament competitors give press interviews , except for who ducks the media attention . sees from across the room , and wants to approach him , but flees with . That evening walks along the shore and sees approaching him . attempts numerous times to apologize for his lack of contact over the last few years , saying he did n't know where to look . Tommy accuses of abandoning him and their mother so that he could have a girlfriend . refuses to acknowledge as his brother , and tells him that his brother died in . The two part ways . begins with 16 contenders in four rounds . Winners move on to the next round . To make matters worse , the undefeated known only as ( ) is making his American debut . enters his first fight and is believed to be a fluke or a " sensation " and nothing more . His opponent is heavily favored to win . enters the ring with no music or fanfare , followed by . His opponent enters , the bell rings , and with a single strike , his opponent . Without bothering to check with the ref , turns and exits the ring as the crowd cheers . prepares for his first fight , and he is an even greater underdog than . 's to echoes through the arena as he walks up to the ring . His opponent , , is heavily favored to win . For the first two rounds , is beaten to a pulp . Midnight is faster and stronger than . During time - outs , reminds why he is fighting . If wants to go home , all he has to do is tap out , but if he does n't win , there wo n't be a home to go home to . During the final round , manages to put in a painful hold and eventually forces him to tap out . The community is shocked that a high school physics teacher has made it through the first round of the tournament . He texts , who had refused to watch his first fight . She jumps for joy when she receives the " I ! " message . prepares for his second fight . Once again he enters the arena without music or entourage . The fight begins and immediately knocks out his opponent before confidently exiting the arena . Paddy smirks . Later that evening , watches the news and is surprised to see a story about . The soldier from has made his helmet - cam video public , and the world is now aware that is an ex - and a war hero . calls for to watch , but is uninterested . He leaves the hotel room and heads to the casino , where he mindlessly feeds a slot machine . catches up with him and asks why he never told him about being a war hero . loses his composure and shouts at . He tells him that his platoon in was on patrol when they were fired upon by friendly forces . His best friend , along with the rest of his unit , was killed , leaving as the sole survivor . up , deserted the corps and fled . One his way he crossed paths with a sinking tank , and feeling compelled to help , he saved those inside , including the soldier with the helmet - cam . While he becomes famous as the soldier who " ripped a tank open with his bare hands " , does n't feel like a hero . All he wants is to win and send his winnings to the family of his fallen " brother " . His story has a single gaping hole , though : The has no record of a ( being his mother 's maiden name ) . Tommy berates and tells him , among other things , to go to hell . prepares for his second fight . Once again he enters the ring and barely survives each round . His stronger , faster opponent nearly bests him , but manages to put him into an inescapable and painful hold . wins , once again , by . Back in , his students are eager to support , or " " They approach and ask if they can watch on the big screen in the school gym . denies their request , telling them to find somewhere else . Secretly watches the fights from home , cheering on . Tommy awakens on the morning of his third fight , after having scolded his father , to the sound of 's drunken slurring of . Heartbroken after the night before , has consumed all the liquor in the mini - bar . He shouts at and his crew to turn around and leave the whale alone . Tommy wrestles with the old man , and lays down with him in his bed , where he hugs him until he passes out . On the night of his third fight , will battle Grimes again . Grimes has been bad - mouthing ever since they first met in the gym . He argues that sucker - punched him , and had he known that was an experienced fighter , he would have been more brutal . Once again enters the arena alone without a provided soundtrack , only to hear the chorus of seated in the stands behind him . He briefly nods to them before facing , who teases and toys with . As the fight progresses , easily drops to the mat and pummels him into unconsciousness . The ref pulls off of 's unconscious body , and immediately exits the arena to the cheers of the . 's third fight is the most lopsided so far . His opponent is the undefeated . and enter the arena and gestures to the front row : Tess has come to watch fight . In , 's students have rented a drive - in theater so they can watch the fights . arrives to watch , too . The fight begins , and proves to be 's toughest opponent thus far . He bloodies 's face and nearly forces him to tap out during the first two rounds . Tess and watch in horror as 's dreams seemingly slip away . rallies his strength and attempts numerous times to put in a hold . He finally succeeds and , unable to escape , taps out . The arena is shocked . and kiss , and all celebrate the defeat of the undefeated . On the day of the fourth fight , news comes of 's true identity . never enlisted in the as , but rather as . The sees that deserted in and will place him under military arrest after the tournament . The greatest shock to those watching is that the final two fighters in are brothers . enters the arena first to to , followed shortly by , with no sight of . Before the fight begins , asks where is , but gets no reply . The fight begins , and a rage - filled pummels . The first round comes to an end with a late punch by and a bloodied . reminds to maintain composure . The second round mirrors the first . unleashes punishing blows while does his best to try and trap in a hold . The second round comes to an end . The third round begins , and despite multiple severe blows , manages to put in a hold , with his left arm trapped beneath 's knee . elbows in the face multiple times , and seconds before the round ends , he overextends his left arm , exerting an audible . His tendon snaps and hears it . tells to stop the fight , as 's left arm is basically broken . ignores the pleas and tells to finish him off in the fourth round . The fourth round begins . Tommy attempts to conceal his dangling left arm as he takes poorly aimed jabs with his right . Brendan backs away and asks why wants to continue to fight . While he attempts to convince to stop numerous times , he realizes that wo n't quit . He spins around and latches into a painful hold . While is still held down by , and their father helplessly watches , tells him , " I love you ! I love you , ! " We then see tap out on 's shoulder . is victorious , but he is more concerned for 's welfare . He wraps his arms around his brother as he lays huddled on the mat . He shoos the cameras and people away and the two walk into the tunnel . looks on from the stands and tears dampen his cheeks . The final image we 're left with is the two brothers walking down the tunnel , slouched over , 's right arm around 's shoulders and his left arm holding 's broken arm , with 's right hand on top of 's hand.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The movie opens with a car towing a new tan through a sub - freezing blizzard to a small inn in , . It is 8:30 p.m. on a cold night in 1987 . When the driver goes inside , we see that it is ( ) , and he uses the false name ' ' to check in . He then goes to the 's bar / restaurant to have a meeting with two men . has obviously never met them before . The short , bug - eyed , dark - haired , annoyed , talkative one , ( ) , tells him that , a mutual acquaintance of theirs who set up the meeting , had said would be there at 7:30 rather than 8:30 . The other man , a tall , blond Swede named ( ) , sits silently and smokes . They discuss the as part of a payment to them from , plus $ 40,000 . Apparently , has hired the men to kidnap his wife in order to get a ransom from his wife 's father . is a fast talker and does n't want to say much about why he needs the money , but he reveals that his father - in - law is wealthy and that he plans on asking for $ 80,000 and keeping the other half for himself . and accept the deal . The next day , returns to his home in , where we see part of his impassive home life . awkwardly greets his laid - back , subservient wife ( ) , but he becomes uncomfortable when he sees his father - in - law , ( ) , sitting on the couch watching a hockey game on TV , visiting that night for supper . They all eat dinner , and and 's young teenage son , ( ) , leaves early to go to 's . and start to argue about this ; that seems to spoil and allows him to do whatever he wants , plus does not inflict much discipline on his son . To get out of the conversation , changes the subject by bringing up a deal he had apparently suggested earlier to , in which he 's asking for a loan of $ 750,000 to build a 40 - acre parking lot in . tells that his associate , , usually looks at those kinds of deals before he does . nervously urges him to accept it , saying he and his family are in desperate need of money soon . , who clearly appears to have a condescending attitude toward , tells him that and will never have to worry about money . ( clearly omits 's name).Another day later , and are driving the towards . tells he wants to stop at " " , and complains that they just had pancakes for breakfast . looks at him and tells him coldly they will stop at . agrees , somewhat reluctantly , they will stop for the night in where they will get pancakes , and " get laid . in , is the executive sales manager at the car lot owns , a job which fits 's talkative , weaselly manner . He 's arguing with a couple about the $ 500 " " sealant on the couple 's new $ 19,000 car , and now is clearly over - charging them for it when they had said they did n't want it . says he will talk to his manager about it , and leaves the room to have a conversation with another salesman about hockey tickets . He comes back and lies to the couple by stating that his manager has approved a $ 100 discount on the , and the husband agrees but profanely accuses of being a liar . The story goes back briefly to a motel room at the , a motel in that evening . and are having enthusiastic sex with two women on separate beds in the same room . They watch ' The ' with on the TV afterwords . The next morning at the ' , and are having an argument about his low grades in school . The phone rings , and it 's calling for . tells him that has looked at the parking lot deal and he says it 's " pretty sweet . " tries to restrain his excitement , as he apparently had thought would n't want to go through with it . They schedule a meeting for 2:30 pm that afternoon . is optimistic about the future meeting with , and is now considering calling off the kidnap / ransom plot . He makes his way to the dealership 's large service garage to seek out a burly Native American mechanic , named ( ) . A man of few words , is apparently the middleman who set up 's earlier meeting with and . Surprisingly , does not know who is . He tells he 'll only vouch for , not . Regardless , tells him that 's fine , but was just wondering if there was an alternate phone number to reach and . casually tells that he ca n't help him anymore , for he has no other means to get in contact with or . is visibly nervous . In the next scene , and are driving and the skyline of the is visible . chats mindlessly to and asks him if he 's ever been to the , to which responds with a short " nope . " goes on about how that 's the most has said all day . He asks how much he 'd like it if he stopped talking . Meanwhile , is sitting in his office at the car dealership talking on the phone . On the other end is a man named ( voice of ) from the banking loan company GMAC who tells that he ca n't read the serial numbers of a list of vehicles on a financing document sent by fax some time ago . is elusive , telling him there 's no problem since the loans are in place already . The man tells him ' yes ' , and that got $ 320,000 last month from the insurance loans for the new set of cars sold , but there 's an audit on the loan and that if can not supply the serial numbers of the cars as proof of the sales to prove that the vehicles exist , will have to recall all of that money . clearly tries to get the man off the phone as quickly as he can while still being vague about the particulars . tells him that he 'll fax him another copy . The man tells him a fax copy is no good , because he ca n't read the serial numbers of the cars from the fax he already has . tells him he 'll send him another one as soon as possible and then hangs up.(Note : It is highly implied at this point that is secretly embezzling money from the car dealership bank accounts either for personal use or to pay off more anonymous debts . So , in order to cover up his crime , he replaced the money he stole by sending fake sales documents to acquire a $ 320,000 insurance loan from for a new batch of cars that he sold ... cars which apparently do n't exist , thus in some part explains why needs $ 320,000 to pay back when they come to recall their loan.)At the ' house , at about the same time is on the phone , sits alone watching a morning TV show . She hears a noise and looks up at the sliding - glass door in the back just as comes up the steps to the back deck , wearing a ski mask and holding a crowbar . He peers through the window as if looking for someone , steps back , and smashes the glass door with the bar . screams and tries to run for the front door , but suddenly barges in through the front door , also wearing a ski mask . He grabs her wrist and she bites his hand . She runs up the stairs as enters . lifts up his mask , looks at the bite , and tells he needs unguent . takes a phone into the second floor bathroom and locks herself in , trying desperately to call 911 . The cord is under the door . and yank the phone out of her hands before she can finish dialing . The door frame starts to break as uses the crowbar to get through . Sobbing hysterically , she frantically tries to pry the screen off the second - story window to escape before the men get in . The door busts open , and the two men stand there looking at an empty bathroom , the window open . runs to go outside to look for her , and raids the medicine cabinet for some salve . As he is about to put it on his hand , he looks up into the mirror and sees the shower curtain drawn on the tub . He pauses for a moment and realizes where is . , hiding in the tub , begins thrashing and screaming and takes off , blindly hurtling through the bathroom and down the hall . She runs screaming , trying to throw off the curtain , and she trips and falls down the flight of stairs and lands hard at the bottom . calmly follows her down the stairs and nudges her body to see if she is alive . At the 2:30 p.m. business meeting , ( ) and tell that the deal is looking good . They ask him what kind of finder 's fee he is looking for . seems confused and tells and that they would be lending all the money to him to proceed with building the parking lot . They explain that while will get a finder 's fee of around 10 % of the $ 750,000 , and will oversee the rest of the development of the parking lot with the rest of the money . ( realizing that $ 75,000 is nowhere near what he needs to pay back his massive debit to ) , tries to convince them to give him all of the $ 750,000 so can invest it himself ... with neither nor overseeing his work . tells they thought his asking for $ 750,000 was merely an investment he brought to them , and states that they are not a bank . insists that and give him all of the 750 grand and he will pay them back the principal and interest when the deal starts paying , but and insist on running the deal themselves . Jerry desperately guarantees them their money back if they let run the deal and let him have all the money , but both and say they are not interested and that they would like to move on the deal independently . goes out to his car alone and vents his rage and frustration with the ice scraper on his frozen windshield . walks into his house later that day . He surveys his empty house , where there are obvious signs of a struggle during the kidnapping . He practices the fake desperate and sad phone call he will make to her father . Later that night , and are driving with the sobbing , now covered with a blanket in the back seat of the car . They pass a huge statue of and the welcome sign for . , smoking and looking out the window as usual , is annoyed by 's whimpering and tells her to shut up or he 'll throw her in the trunk . , that 's more than I 've heard you say all week , " tells him . gives him a hard , cold stare and turns away . It is then that a cruiser behind them flips on its lights and pulls them over . realizes they 're being stopped because he failed to put temporary vehicle registration tags on the car , and he tells he 'll take care of it . He tells to keep quiet or they 'll shoot her . Gaear stares at him expressionlessly . The trooper approaches 's window and asks for a driver 's license and registration . gives the trooper his driver 's license , but does not have the car 's vehicle registration or insurance . He then tries unsuccessfully to coolly bribe the trooper , who tells him to step out of the car . Nervously , hesitates , and makes a noise in the back seat . The trooper points his flashlight at . Quickly , reaches across , grabs the trooper 's hair , slams his head onto the door , pulls a pistol from the box , and shoots him in the head , blowing his brains out . sits stunned , the trooper 's blood having splattered across his face , and an angry tells him to ditch the body . As lifts the dead trooper by the arms , a pair of headlights starts towards them down the highway . He freezes in the lights , holding the obviously dead man in his arms by the police car . The two people in the car stare as they pass . quickly climbs into the driver 's seat and takes off after the other car . He is briefly puzzled when its tail lights vanish in the dark , but quickly spots the car turned over in the snow on the roadside . stops and jumps out of the car . The driver is limping and trying to run across the snowy field . fires once , striking the man in the back . He falls face - first and dies . then walks over to the upside down car and looks inside , where a young woman is lying awkwardly in her upside - down seat . He leans back , aims his pistol , and the screen cuts to black as he shoots her . A little later , the phone rings at the home of a sleeping couple , police chief ( ) and her husband ( ) . As she gets out of bed we see she is very pregnant . Norm makes her some breakfast before she goes out to the scene of the shooting . That morning , arrives at the scene of the overturned car driven by the collateral shooting victims . is observant and quick - working , and she determines from the size of the footprints that the shooter was a heavyset individual . She surmises the events we 've already seen - the trooper pulled over a motorist for a traffic violation , said motorist shot him . The second car came driving past , and the shooter , realizing they 'd seen him , chased them down and shot them . Marge then looks at the trooper 's unit , parked several hundred yards up the road and sees a set of smaller prints by the trooper 's body , lying in the snow by the roadside . Here , deduces that a second , smaller man was involved . From the fact that the trooper 's car 's lights were turned off , deduces that the accomplice was warming up in the cruiser while the heavy person was chasing down the two witnesses . As and the other officer , ( ) , drive away , notes that the trooper 's notebook was lying on the floor of his car , which the killers apparently overlooked , and they find their first clue : the officer had partially filled out a ticket at 2:18 am for a with a license plate number starting with . Marge realizes that this is not the beginning of a license plate number , but an abbreviation of the word " dealer " which is an indication that the car was stopped because it had dealer plates that had n't been changed yet . At a restaurant in , , , and sit and discuss 's kidnapping . tells them that the kidnappers called him and expressly told him not to call the cops . is angry and insists on calling the police . As a surprise to , sides with and says they should not call the police or negotiate with the kidnappers and that they should give them the ransom . tells the men asked for one million dollars ( obviously planning to give and their $ 40,000 and to keep the rest for himself to pay off his debits ) . also says he needs the money ready by tomorrow . offers to stay with and wait for a phone call from the kidnappers , but tells him the men said they 'd deal only with him . asks if will be okay . It seems to suddenly dawn on that this will affect his son , and he seems visibly upset or at least surprised that he had never thought about his scheme affecting before . At home , tells about the kidnapping , and the boy cries and asks if will be okay . Jerry nods and does n't offer much comfort . He tells the boy that if anyone calls for , he should just say she is visiting relatives in . That afternoon , and pull up to a cabin by a lake , and opens the back door to guide inside . She is hooded and tied at the wrists . Jean squeals and tries to run away ; reaches to catch her , but stops him and watches her running blindly in the snow , laughing hysterically . She falls , and laughs hysterically . , staring expressionlessly , goes to get her . Downtown in , goes to the police station to eat lunch , and her husband is waiting there for her with food from 's . As they eat , pokes his head into 's office and tells her that the night before the shootings , two men checked into the with a with dealer plates ; apparently , " they had company . "Marge goes to a bar to interview the two women who hired to have sex with him and in the motel . The two ditsy women , whom work as strippers at the bar during the evening hours , are not very helpful in describing the two men . The first one describes , the " little fella , " as funny - looking , and the other describes , the " big fella " , as an older man who did n't talk much but smoked a lot . The women tell that the men told them that they were headed to the . In the cabin , is banging the top of the staticky TV , cursing at it . is tied to a chair , the hood covering her head and her cold breath steaming through the fabric . sits with the same emotionless expression , watching silently as screams and bangs on the TV , trying to improve the reception . Late at night at the ' house , they turn off the TV to go to sleep . The phone rings for , and it 's ( ) calling ; apparently an old acquaintance of hers from high school , he tells her that he 's in the and that he saw her on the news in the story about the triple homicide in . makes brief but polite conversation as the man chatters . The next morning , is half - heartedly selling a car as he gets a phone call from in his office . tells him that he will be arriving tomorrow to pick up the ransom , but demands more money so he and can leave the country because of the shootings . He demands the entire ransom of $ 80,000 , unaware that told the ransom is $ 1 million . As soon as hangs up , gets another phone call from the man at , telling him he never received the serial numbers for the vehicles in the mail as told him the previous day . , again being elusive about the subject , maintains that the documents are still in the mail . The man at sternly tells that he will refer the matter of the accounting irregularities to the company 's legal department if he does n't get the VIN numbers of the vehicles by the close of business the very next day . After the man at hangs up , flies into a rage as he realizes that his control over the situation is fading fast . In , and sit in a buffet restaurant eating lunch together . An officer comes in with some papers , and tells he found phone numbers from two phone calls that were made that night from the room at where the killers stayed , both to . The first one was to a trucking company , and another to the residence of . tells the officer and Norm that she 'll take a drive down to to investigate . At night at the ' house , , , and are sitting around the kitchen table . is telling he wants to deliver the $ 1 million himself to the kidnapper , and is upset , saying that they wanted to deal only with him . ( clearly distrustful of ) says that if he ca n't deliver it , he 'll go to the authorities . The next day , leaves behind at the lakeside cabin to look after , while he drives alone to to pick up the ransom money . first drives to the airport . He drives the up to the roof of the parking garage and steals a license plate off another snow - covered car so he can replace the dealer tags ( to prevent him from being pulled over by the police again ) . At the exit booth of the garage , he tells the attendant that he has decided not to park there and that he does n't want to pay . The friendly man explains that there 's a flat four dollar fee . does n't want to pay , but the polite parking attendant insists that he pay . gets upset and insults him by saying : " I guess you think , you know , you 're an authority figure , with that stupid fucking uniform . Huh , buddy ? " he sneers . However , he gives him the money anyway and drives off . At the dealership garage , goes to talk to only to find questioning him . is questioning about the phone call made to him from the a few nights ago by one of the suspects of the three murders in her town . Shep claims that he does n't remember receiving any phone call . She reminds him that he has a criminal record and currently is on parole , though nothing in his record suggests him capable of homicide , so if he had been talking to criminals and became an accessory to the murders , that would land him back in prison . She then asks him cheerfully if he might remember anything now . then goes to visit with in his office . He is clearly antsy as he nervously doodles on a notepad . She tells him that she is investigating three murders in her upstate town of and asks him if there has been a stolen from the lot lately , but he dances anxiously around her question by changing the subject . He eventually tells her there have n't been any stolen vehicles , and she leaves . When he sees leave , pick up his office phone and tries to call in the garage , but another mechanic tells that has just left ; he just walked out after talking with . That evening , goes to eat dinner at the restaurant ; she apparently has spoken to , the man who called her late at night , and he meets her there . He is chatty and a little odd , and he is obviously and awkwardly trying to hit on her . He tries to change seats so as to sit next to her in the booth , but she politely tells him to sit back across from her , saying , " Just so I can see , ya know . Do n't have to turn my neck . " He apologizes awkwardly and clumsily launches into a story about his wife , whom he and both knew from school but has since died of leukemia . He starts to cry , telling he always liked her a lot . She comforts him politely . In the celebrity room at another hotel , sits at a table with another prostitute . He hits on her awkwardly as they watch on a small stage . Later in the prostitute 's seedy apartment , they are having sex . Suddenly , she is flung off from on top of him by , who has somehow tracked down and is furious at for nearly getting him in trouble with . He kicks the escort in the rear as she runs screaming and naked down the hall . Shep beats up a tenant that appears in the hall asking about the noise . Shep goes back into the apartment and beats up , first punching him and then throwing him across the room and hitting him viciously with his belt . Sometime later , , cut up and bruised from the beating , calls at his house . He is humiliated and extremely agitated . He tells to bring the ransom money to the parking garage roof in 30 minutes or he 'll kill him and his family . , listening on the other line in the house , immediately leaves with the briefcase full of the million dollars . almost asks if he could come along , but being afraid of his antagonistic father - in - law , he chooses to say nothing . As he drives , reveals he has brought a gun in his jacket and practices what he will say to the kidnapper . leaves soon after him to see what will happen . On the roof of the parking garage , sits waiting in his idling as pulls up . demands to know where is , and demands to see . demands that give him the briefcase with the money in it , but refuses unless he sees his daughter . Surprised and angry by 's demands , shoots in the stomach without hesitating and goes to snatch the briefcase from his hands . shoots in the face as he leans over . reels back and grabs his wounded right jaw after being gazed by the bullet . He quickly lethally shoots multiple times . Clutching his bleeding jaw while screaming in agonizing pain , grabs the briefcase , gets into his car , and drives away . As he speeds through the garage , he passes . Both of them take a quick notice of each other , but continues driving on . He drives up to the garage attendant and , holding his bloody jaw , tells the man to open the gate . At the same time , continues up to the roof and finds lying there , shot dead . casually pops open his car trunk ( to put his father - in - law in the trunk of his leaves the garage with in his trunk , he sees that has killed the attendant with a bullet to the head and smashed through the exit gate , breaking it off . A distraught goes home , and tells him called for him . tells everything went fine , and he goes to bed without calling back . In the next morning , ( ) , one of 's deputies , stops by the house of a chatty older man , named ( ) , who is shoveling snow off his driveway . The man had apparently reported an incident at his bar , and he tells that a few days ago " a little funny - looking man " ( obviously ) asked him where he could " get some action in the area " ( hookers ) . When he refused , had threatened the man and stupidly bragged about killing someone . He also says that mentioned that he was staying out near a lake . The bar had been near , he tells the officer , so he believes that that is the place was talking about . politely thanks the neighbor for the tip and leaves . Meanwhile , is stopped on the side of a snowy road , a bloody rag pressed against his wounded jaw . He looks inside the briefcase and is astounded at how much is inside ; he had expected $ 80,000 and instead got the million that had been planning to keep mostly for himself . After thinking for a minute , takes out the $ 80,000 that apparently would still be expecting and throws it in the backseat . He closes the case , fixes his rag , and takes it out into the snow beside a fence . He looks right and left , seeing only fence and snow , and he buries the money . sticks an ice scraper into the snow on top as the only marker besides the bloodied snow he 'd dug aside ( presumably to come back later for the rest of it ) , and he drives away . In , sits next to her packed luggage in her hotel room talking on the phone to a female friend . She tells the friend that she saw and that he was upset from his wife 's death . The woman tells that never married that woman , that he had been bothering her for some time and that she is still alive . She tells that has been having life - long psychiatric problems and he has been living in an insane asylum for a few years now and that he is now living with his parents . Marge then checks out of the hotel , buys a breakfast sandwich from a restaurant , and silently ponders her next move and she contends driving back to having gotten nowhere with her investigation . But then a thought pops into her head as she remembers something . then goes to visit at the car dealership , obviously having picked up something from his nervous and elusive behavior on her first visit the day before . He sits in his office writing out a new sales form for , making sure the serial numbers for the non - existent vehicles are again smudged and illegible . He is irritated by her visit . He tries to get her out , but polite and insistent as usual , tells him that the she 's investigating had dealer plates and that someone who works at the dealership got a phone call from the perpetrators , which is too much of a coincidence . She asks if he 's done a lot count recently , and rather than answer , yells at her by saying that the car is not from that lot . In a serious tone , tells not to get snippy with her . tells her he is cooperating , but it 's obvious to us that he is now clearly insane at realizing the depth of the mess he has created and how miserably all his assorted schemes have failed . He jumps up , puts on his hat and coat , and tells her he 'll go inventory the lot right now . Marge waits at the desk , looking at his picture of and at the loan form on his desk . From the window she sees him driving out of the lot . She hurriedly calls the state police from 's desk phone . At the cabin , sits in his long johns eating a TV dinner as he watches a soap opera on the fuzzy television . comes in with his bloodied face and the $ 80,000 he took from the briefcase before he buried it . looks unfazed by 's extensive wound . asks what happened to , who is lying on the kitchen floor motionless , still tied to the chair ; there is blood on the stove behind her . tells she started screaming and would n't stop . shows him the money , takes his $ 40,000 , and tells him he 's keeping the and that can have his old truck and they must part ways . tells him they 'll split the car . "How do you split a fuckin ' car , dummy ? ! With a ' chainsaw ? " spits at him , his words slurred from his jaw wound . tells him one will pay the other for half , so must pay half for the value of the car from his share money so he can take the car for himself . refuses and screams that he got shot in the face and makes an implied threat that he will keep the as extra compensation . storms out of the front door to the car to drive away . Seconds later , comes running out behind him wielding an ax . As turns around , raises the ax and the scene cuts to black as the blade lands in 's neck . A little later , is driving along an isolated road talking on the CB radio to . They are discussing 's kidnapping ; that a police detective learned from and 's son , and the fact that her father , , is missing . She tells she is driving around , following the tip from the loudmouth bar owner . Their conversation reveals that the news has gotten word out on the wire for the public to keep an eye out for and . She suddenly spots the parked in front of the cabin . tells her he will send her back - up . When she gets out , she hears the loud roar of the motor of a power tool in the distance . She makes her way around the house towards the noise behind the cabin , and sees pushing 's dismembered foot down into a wood - chipper , having chopped up his dead body and disposing of it . There is a huge puddle of blood and the rest of 's body in the snow . works at getting the rest of into the chipper , using a small log to push it down . pulls her gun and yells at him to put his hands up , but he does n't hear over the machine . She yells again , and he turns around to see her . She points to the police crest on her hat , aiming her gun at him . He turns quickly , hurls the log at her , and takes off across the frozen lake behind the cabin . The log glances her leg , and she fires after him twice as he flees . One shot hits him in the back of his thigh . He falls in the snow , and she arrests him . Marge drives away with handcuffed in the backseat . " So that was in there ? " she asks , looking at him in the rear view mirror . He looks expressionlessly out the window . guess that was your accomplice in the wood - chipper . And those three people in ... " He does not react ; she is talking mostly to herself . She tells him there is more to life than a little bit of money . " Do n't you know that ? " she asks . She pulls over to the side of the road as a fleet of cruisers and an ambulance drive toward them on their way to the cabin . " And here you are . And it 's a beautiful day . "Two days later , at a motel outside of , , two state policemen bang on a room door asking for a . The voice inside , 's , tells them he 'll be there in a sec . The owner unlocks the door , and is seen trying to escape out the bathroom window , wearing only a - shirt and boxers . He screams and flails wildly and insanely as the police arrest him . That night at the Gundersons ' , climbs into bed next to . He tells her the mallard he painted for a stamp contest has been chosen to be on the three cent stamp , but another man he knows got the twenty - nine cent . tells him she 's proud of him and that people use the three cent stamp all the time . Norm rests his hand on her pregnant belly and says , " Two more months . "She smiles and rests her hand on his , and repeats , " Two more months . "</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) , a retired Polish automobile assembly line worker and veteran , haunted by memories of that conflict , lives with his in a changing , neighborhood which is dominated by immigrants . At the start of the movie , is attending his wife 's funeral , bristling at the shallow eulogy of young ( ) . Similarly , he has little patience with his two sons , ( ) and ( ) , and their families , who show little regard for 's grief or the memory of their dead mother . Throughout the movie , views his relatives as rude , spoiled and self - absorbed , always avoiding him unless it 's in their own interest to pay him some attention . 's sons see him as " always disappointed " with them and their families , unaware of their own obnoxiousness . tells that , made made him promise to try to get to go to a confession . writes off as knowing nothing about life or death , and insists on being called " " rather than " " because he feels he neither knows , nor wants to know , . 's teenage neighbors , a shy ( ) and his feisty sister ( ) , live with their widowed mother and grandmother . When a Hispanic gang confronts , a gang , led by 's older cousin ( ) , helps by frightening the Hispanic one and forcing them to flee . The gang , at that point , tries to persuade to join them . 's initiation is to steal 's prized car , a 1972 . interrupts the robbery , pointing a rifle in 's face and forcing him to flee . After a few days , and his gang return . With at his side , manages to verbally confront them to no avail . The gang drags off his porch in an attempt to assault him . His family tries desperately to fend off and his cohorts . The conflict ends when threatens the gang members with his rifle and orders them to get off his lawn . They leave the neighborhood , telling to watch his back . The thank a grumpy and impatient , who insists he only wanted the " gooks " off his property . When the neighborhood hears of 's brave act , they reward him by leaving gifts of dishes and garden plants on his porch . admits to trying to steal his . is n't pleased , seeking only to be left alone . goes to , upset at not him for not calling the police and reminding him of his wife 's desire for him to go to confession . refuses . and his wife , ( ) go to visit on his birthday , bringing him a cake and a few gifts meant to make certain menial tasks easier . Presentation , and explanation , of these gifts quickly turn into a shamelessly brazen pitch to get to move into a senior 's retirement home . Knowing that and just want to get their hands on his house , growls in anger and throws them out ; gifts , cake and all . and ca n't understand 's reaction . After seeing being harassed by three black teenagers , steps in to rescue her , confronting the teenagers and threatening them with a 1911 pistol . gets to know , and invites him to a family barbecue on his birthday , bringing him closer to her family , explaining culture and that during the they fought on " his " side . , , and their mother visit the next day , with 's family forcing him to work for for a week to atone for his attempted theft of the . has clean up the neighborhood until his debt is paid and shows the ways of American men . He gets a construction job and encourages him to ask out another girl called . After discovering blood when he coughs , visits the doctor . After viewing the results of his examination , which indicate that his health is n't good , he calls his son and awkwardly tries to tell him about it ; but he ca n't bring himself to do it and just tries to make small talk . However , and say they 're too busy to talk to him . Meanwhile , the gang keeps pressuring to join them . When they find walking home alone after work , they rob him and burn his face with a cigarette . confronts , second - in - command in the gang , at his house , and beats him up in retaliation . The gang returns days later and shoots up the ' home in a drive - by , wounding in the neck . runs to check on them and hears that , who had left for her aunt 's house before the shooting , never arrived . A few minutes later another gang car drives by and throws out into the street . gets to her feet and walks into the house , and it 's seen she 's been beaten to a pulp and raped . The family chooses not to tell police who did it . storms home , punching cupboards and bloodying his knuckles in anger . goes to visit him later , deeply concerned about both and . gives a beer and they talk openly . calls ' ' , but is now open to calling him by his first name . The next day , an angry urges to take vengeance on the gang with him . first tells him to come back later as revenge must be planned carefully . He tells to return late in the afternoon . During this time , mows his lawn , takes a bath , and gets himself a haircut , tipping the barber generously and a new tailored suit . He goes to and much to the amazement of , asks to make confession . initially believes that retaliated against the gang , or is going to , but accepts 's request . then confesses three minor sins he committed : He once kissed another woman without 's knowledge , he did n't pay the taxes after selling a boat and motor for $ 900 and was never very close with his two sons . prescribes a standard penitence prayer . When returns to 's house at the appointed time , gives him the medal he earned in , but then locks him in the basement , saying he does n't want him to live with the consequences of killing someone . tells about a sin that haunted him every day - killing a young enemy soldier , who was surrendering to him . then leaves with and 's grandmother , and from a bar he often goes to , calls , telling her where to find the key to unlock his basement so she can let out . Meanwhile , is with two police officers outside 's house . had talked the sergeant into sending them on a stakeout , because he believes will bring there for a shootout confrontation with the gang . But the whole neighborhood remains quiet and the sergeant finally recalls the officers , who make leave with them . arrives at 's house to let out of the basement . He hurriedly explains 's leaving him there and they hurry off to the gang house . Outside the gang members ' house , confronts them for the shootout and raping of , causing the neighbors to come out and observe the confrontation . He takes out a cigarette from his jacket , puts it in his mouth , asks the gang for a light , and then slowly reaches into his jacket before pulling his hand out quickly . Thinking is going to shoot , the gang members gun him down . A shot of lying dead on the ground reveals he had grabbed his lighter , not a gun . When and arrive at the crime scene , they are told by the police that the gang has been arrested and , with the rest of the community prepared to testify against them , they will be imprisoned for a long time , having killed an unarmed man . , still with 's pinned to his shirt , glares at and as they are loaded into police cars . A funeral service is held for with delivering a memorable eulogy of . and his family attend the funeral opposite 's large extended family , and is puzzled by their presence . At the reading of 's will , it 's revealed that left his house to the church , and his to , on the condition he does n't modify it , much to the disappointment and puzzlement of 's family . In the final scene , is driving the up with next to him.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > On a warm , sunny day , 10 - year - old ( : ; Japanese : ) and 4 - year - old ( : ; Japanese : ) drive with their father , ( : ; Japanese : ) , along a rural road towards their new home . The girls are excited about the move since it will bring them closer to their mother , ( : ; Japanese : ) , who is ill in the hospital ( it is implied that she has house is old and falling apart in places , but the girls find it charming and set out immediately to explore . They open all the windows and doors before daring to venture up the stairs into the attic . rustling is heard in the darkness above before an acorn falls down the steps . Intrigued , the girls go up and yell at the darkness . When nothing responds , runs to the opposite end of the attic to open the window as notices dark , fuzzy things in the wall , staring at them intently . goes back downstairs but 's curiosity is piqued . She reaches a tentative finger into a crack in the wall and startles a mess of black sootballs , one of which she is able to capture between her hands . Back downstairs , she runs into ( : ; : ) , an elderly next - door neighbor who 's been watching over the house . Granny notices 's and 's hands and feet covered in soot and exclaims that they must have stumbled upon , or soot sprites , which will most likely leave soon now that people are in the house . Her grandson , ( : ; Japanese : ) , emerges outside and shouts that the house is haunted . Granny scolds him and he runs off . That night , the family enjoys a bath together while the house moans and creaks from the wind . The girls become anxious , but their father encourages them to laugh , saying that their laughter will encourage any spirits in the house to disperse . Sure enough , as they laugh together , the clan of leaves the house through the roof and drifts away on the wind . The next morning , cooks and assembles lunch for her family . She places 's lunch in a and says farewell as she heads off for school . , a professor at a local university , works from home while plays outside . As she plays , she notices two white , rabbit - like ears poking out of the grass . She watches as the figure , a small , semi - transparent creature , walks past her towards the house . She follows it until it runs off and hides under the porch . It emerges with a larger , blue companion carrying a bag full of acorns , and they attempt to sneak past . However , she quickly notices them and chases them to the edge of the woods . She follows them up a path through the shrubbery , losing her hat in the process , to a large camphor tree where they disappear into a hole beneath the roots . falls into it and lands in a mossy hollow where she meets a large , slumbering version of the creatures she followed . It identifies itself with a series of roars that interprets as ( a mispronunciation on her part of , the Japanese word for troll ) . falls asleep on 's furry belly . ( 's adventure -- following rabbit - like creatures and falling down a hole , like 's -- is one of several references the movie makes to older children 's stories.)Satsuki arrives home from school to find missing . She and her father search for her until finds 's hat near the edge of the woods . Following the same path took , and her father find her sleeping in a clearing within the bushes . Confused , tries to retrace her steps back to the tree where she found . When she becomes upset that she ca n't find it again , explains that she must have come into contact with a spirit of the forest who probably does n't want to be found right now . They walk together around the property to the large camphor tree that fell into and offer their respects to the spirits for watching over . That afternoon , the family takes a bike ride further into town to see the girls ' mother . They pass and working in rice paddies , and and blow raspberries at one another . At the hospital , the girls tell their mother how wonderful the new house is , and brags that when is well enough to come home she will sleep with her in her bed . The family enjoys their time together and brushes 's hair . One day at school , is surprised to see and waiting for her outside . Although was given into 's care that day while went to university , she wants to be with no one but . agrees to let stay in school with her , with the teacher 's permission . As they walk home that afternoon , a rainstorm comes upon them unexpectedly . and take shelter under the roof of a small shrine until approaches and silently offers them his umbrella , though he does so with a little abrasiveness to hide his kindness . Later on , and return the umbrella to 's mother ( who had not known about 's kind act , though he was pleased with himself ) before walking to the bus station to wait for their father . While the sisters wait in their rain gear , with an extra umbrella , grows tired and places her on her back to sleep . suddenly sees two clawed feet stand next to her . She looks up to see none other than waiting beside her . When she sees that he has nothing to shelter him from the rain but a large leaf , she offers him the extra umbrella . Pleased with the shelter and the noise the raindrops make on the umbrella , roars with joy as headlights appear down the dark road . becomes puzzled when the headlights start to bounce . A bus does appear , but one that is mainly a large cat . grins widely at them as hands Satsuki a leaf - wrapped package before getting on and departing . ( With its wide mouth and face , striped body , and ability to disappear , bears more than a passing resemblance to 's . ) arrives on the regular bus , apologizing that he ran late . The girls walk home with him and open their package to find that it 's filled with acorns . They go outside to the garden and plant them . That night , and are awakened by sounds outside and discover ( who has 's umbrella ) and his company of smaller totoros walking around the garden in a procession . They join them outside and mimic their dancing to encourage the acorns to grow . Saplings spring up and quickly grow larger before merging into one giant tree ( and the ) . As the girls cheer , pulls out a large , spinning top and stands on it . The girls cling to the fur on his belly and he flies into the air ( still carrying the umbrella , like ) , up the trunk of the tree . They sit on the high branches together , making music with hollow gourds . The next morning , the girls wake up to find the tree gone . However , they notice that the seeds they planted have already started to sprout . During one afternoon , the girls enjoy a picnic with , who has prepared a fresh meal of vegetables grown from her garden . She tells them that fresh vegetables will help their mother get better . A telegram arrives for from the hospital . Worried for her mother , rushes to 's house to phone her father . After contacting the hospital , he calls her back to say her mother is fine , but wo n't be able to come home that weekend due to a set - back in her treatment . Despite his assurances , takes the news hard and yells at when she fails to understand why their mother ca n't come home . Granny explains to Satsuki that their mother should be fine but begins to cry and fears that her mother will die . sees this and decides to go to the hospital to give her mother an ear of corn so that she will feel better . No one sees her go . By the time notices that is missing , she is long gone . The entire neighborhood pitches in to search for her while runs everywhere , remorseful for having yelled at her . One tense moment yields to relief when identifies a shoe found in a nearby pond as not belonging to . Still desperate to find , runs home and asks permission to enter 's realm . She finds the hole in the roots where fell in and stumbles upon . She tearfully begs him to help her find . Happy to be of assistance , takes to the top of his tree and summons , who takes her straight to , sitting alone by the side of the road . After hearing that got lost on the way to the hospital , offers to take them there . Perched in a tree outside their mother 's window , the girls see their father visiting . They leave 's corn on the windowsill and write a get - well message on the husk . takes them home . The end credits show 's and 's mother finally coming home , with scenes of the children playing with friends while and the other spirits watch them , unseen.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The movie opens on an episode of the popular game show ' To Tell the ' set in 1977 where three contestants appear claiming to the panelists to be the legendary ( ) who impersonated an airline pilot , a lawyer , and a doctor , as well as scammed people on three continents for millions of dollars ... all before reaching the age of nineteen . gets asked who caught him and he reveals the name of . The film then shifts to 1969 , with agent ( ) arriving at a French prison to extradite a flu - stricken , who attempts to escape from the prison but is too sick to even make it outside . surrenders and asks to take him home . The film then flashes back to six years earlier . 16 - year - old lives in , with his father , ( ) , and French mother ( ) . idolizes his father and is so proud of seeing him being inducted into the club wall of honor as a lifetime member . One morning , 's father rouses him out of bed and takes him to a store where watches as his father cons a woman into lending him a black suit for then drives his father to the dressed with the suit and pretending to be his chauffeur , in a ruse to impress the bank people and secure a loan . When the loan is denied ( due to a series of tax frauds by ) , the family is forced to move from their grand home to a small apartment , which causes tension between 's parents . is then enrolled in a public school where he shows up for his first day in his former school 's uniform . When he hears some guys in his class making fun of his uniform as he enters the class , saying it makes him look like a substitute teacher , walks to front of the class and pretends to be the new class ' substitute teacher , even sending away the real substitute teacher claiming there was a mistake . The ruse goes on for a week 's time before is found out , and his parents are called in to discuss the matter . While his mother is upset by this , 's father is rather impressed by how far his son was able to go with the con . One day , coming back from school , catches his mother having an adulterous affair with his father 's friend ( ) . His mother tries to buy his silence , but is too upset to care . Soon afterwards , comes home to find out that his parents are getting a divorce . When asked with which of his parents he wishes to stay with , runs away from home , using his checkbook to con his way into transportation and shelter . When quickly runs out of money , he tries to create fake checks from his own checkbook , and then tries to pull confidence scams on bank tellers with very little success . One day ( after yet another failure ) , he takes notice of some airline pilots and some stewardesses checking into a hotel . Seeing how they are given the VIP treatment everywhere they go inspires . He cons his way into obtaining a pilot 's uniform and learns more about the airline by pretending to be a college student doing a report on , and interviewing one of its top brass and former pilot . then uses the uniform and knowledge to create fake checks from , which he successfully cashes at banks and hotels all over - . The con works as even a bank manager who turned him down earlier gets caught up in the ruse . tries to run the same check scam at an airport , but gets confused with an expected deadhead pilot heading to . rolls with it , and experiences his very first flight followed by his first sexual experience with one of the stewardess . In , by openly flirting with one of the bank tellers , learns some valuable information about check routing . He then purchases a check coding machine from an auction , which he uses to further his schemes and create checks with bigger amounts . Meanwhile , , a nearly humorless but persistent agent , has caught on to 's check fraud and tracks the latest falsified check to a hotel , where discovers to his surprise that is still a resident there , and breaks into his room to arrest him . emerges from the bathroom dressed in a suit , and knowing only that is from the , pretends to be " " of the , and brazenly claims to have just caught the suspect before showed up . It is not until after has escaped from the room that realizes he has been fooled . Following the encounter , the information in the room and 's description bring no clues , and fingerprints collected in the room lead nowhere . During another interview with the brass , finds out he has accumulated several nicknames , such as " The " and " The of the sky " . Emboldened by this title , purchases a Bond - style suit and an - vehicle that he takes for a joyride . Shortly afterwards , he runs into a magazine model at a hotel he 's staying at , named ( ) . She offers to spend the night with him for $ 1000 , but claims he only has a check for $ 1400 . Cheryl then requests that he endorse it to her , and she 'll pay him the remaining $ 400 in cash ... resulting in the girl actually paying to sleep with soon attempts to use the money he has stolen to find a way to reunite his divorced parents . He invites his father to a fancy restaurant , and gives him the keys to a brand new . explains that he ca n't accept the gift , since the are still watching him , and that refuses to talk to him . Some months later on , is working in the office by himself , when calls to apologize for tricking him back at the hotel . does n't accept the apology , and dares to meet him face to face . gives his location and room number , but does n't believe him . As the conversation continues on , soon realizes the reason for the call : has no one else to talk to . angrily hangs up , and continues his investigation with a renewed vitality . later discovers that the name is a character in " The " comic books , and surmises that might be a minor , which explains why they have been unsuccessful in finding any record of him or matching him through fingerprints . Remembering that had made a reference to the during their phone conversation , has his men check for runaways in the area . Their search eventually leads them to 's mother , who has now remarried to . Upon seeing 's yearbook picture , immediately recognizes him and finally knows who his suspect is . He then reveals to 's mother that has already stolen about 1.3 million dollars in check fraud . Some time later , while visiting a friend at a hospital in , meets and takes an interest in a young hospital nurse named ( ) . He decides to enroll with the by pretending to be a doctor with a forged diploma from medical school and an impressive made up resume . He gets hired as the emergency room night administrator and makes sure to have on his staff . Although he has no medical knowledge or experience , is able to influence the medical interns on his staff to step up and make medical calls on their own so he can deal with the administrative side of things without ever touching patients . Eventually , he wins over and the two fall in love . After finding out that her parents have disowned her when she had an abortion in the past , attempts to help her reconcile with her family by proposing to . Meanwhile , visits 's father who openly refuses to give up his son . However , finds a letter from with his address in . The address leads and his team to 's home , but is already gone to to meet with 's parents . does notice 's diploma with 's new alias which takes him to the hospital which has already quit . and meet with her parents in , where not only claims to be a like them , but also that he is a qualified lawyer as well as a doctor . 's father , ( ) , questions about his feelings which leads to openly admit that he is not a lawyer , a doctor or a co - pilot but takes it as just a romantic speech and agrees to give away his daughter 's hand . also passes the exam and joins 's law firm as an assistant prosecutor . As preparations for the wedding continue , travels back to to visit his father and tell him about the engagement . , now a employee and still struggling with the , reveals to his son that his mother has married and completely moved on , which devastates . He also reveals that he got a visit from the and knows what is doing . desperately asks his father to tell him to stop , but encourages him to keep going instead . Incensed that his father is unable to act like a father , takes leave of On , calls at the office , who has been expecting the call and has his team listening in on it . says he is done and settling down and asks to stop chasing him . informs him that this is not possible , since has stolen about $ 4 million at this point . understands and hangs up , not realizing he made a mistake by telling about the engagement . , having found 's alias in earlier , deduces that had to keep the same name when he moved to , because he is dating a girl who thinks it is his actual name ( changing his name would bring about too many questions).After looking through wedding announcements , and his men manage to track down on the night of the engagement party , leading to confess to who he really is , before escaping out a window , and asking her to meet him at the local airport a few days later . However , when she arrives as planned , is devastated to see is being watched closely by a number of disguised agents which easily makes . When does n't appear , has his men stake out the airport , certain that will attempt to show him up somehow , and try to escape by plane instead of leaving town in a quieter way . puts a new plan into effect , where he poses as a recruiting pilot from airlines , visiting a local college to recruit stewardesses to travel to . He holds auditions where he picks the hottest girls he can find and dresses them up in uniforms . He then goes to the airport where he walks amongst the crowd while using the girls as a wall of " eye candy " , completely distracting the agents from ever looking at him . manages to walk right past 's men and escapes to . He also uses a decoy in the unloading zone just to mess with further . Seven months later , in 1967 , advises his boss that has been forging checks all over the . Only this time , the checks are the real thing . Claiming that is completely out of control , he requests permission to track him down in . His boss however , denies him permission , citing that if could n't catch while he was within the , he wo n't catch him in . refuses to give up and takes one of 's bogus checks to professional printers who deduce , from the quality of the check , that it must have been printed on a specific kind of printer that is only available in a handful of European countries , one of which is . Remembering from an interview with 's mother that she was born in , travels to her birthplace of and finds , on , inside a massive printing factory , printing thousands upon thousands of checks . tells that he came with the French police and promised them to arrest him himself . assumes is lying but convinces him that he will be shot if he walks out of the factory without . agrees to handcuff himself and takes him outside , where , seeing no police , he compliments on his ability to fool him . Almost immediately however , the French police arrive and escort to prison , while promises to have extradited back to the USA.After two years , is released into 's custody ( as was seen in the opening of the film ) , and on 1969 , the plane extraditing flies into the . As they prepare to land , informs ( who has been requesting several times to call his father ) that died accidentally the previous year . Devastated , locks himself in the plane 's bathroom and escapes from the plane to track down where his mother lives . His escape leads them the residence where finds his mother , happily married to her second husband , who now has a young daughter whom realizes is his half - sister . With his father dead and realizing his mother has moved on , quietly surrenders as and the local police arrive , and arrest him ( before his Mom and her new family can realize who he is finally tried , convicted , and sentenced to 12 years , completely isolated , in a maximum security prison of . During the next four years , receives regular visits from , especially around time . During one of these visits , easily identifies a forger is chasing after simply by glancing at a check that casually shows him , giving the agent an idea . Some times later , visits again , only this time , with his boss . They give him a check which he aptly identifies as fake as soon as he touches it , which makes smile . In 1974 , arranges for to be allowed to serve out the remainder of his sentence working for the check fraud department of the under 's custody . Although is out of prison , he is chained to his desk job and misses the thrill of his old life . When he stumbles upon a pilot uniform , gets tempted into posing as an airline pilot once again . Just as he 's about to fly away , meets him at the airport . allows him to go free , predicting that will return to work on since there is no one chasing him anymore . Back in the office on morning , is nervous when does n't show up for work on time . However , does show up , and the two begin going over a recently discovered check forgery that shows some new methods of forgery they have n't encountered before . As they look over the check , asks something that has been on his mind for years : how he cheated on the , to become a lawyer . claims he did n't cheat , and that he studied for two weeks and passed the exam on his own merits . inquires to know if this is the truth , but prefers to focus on the case at hand and presses on . It is then revealed , through scrolling text , that " has been happily married for 26 years " had three sons , lives in the with his family , is still good friends with , caught some of the world 's most elusive money forgers and gets millions of dollars each year because of his work creating unforgeable checks.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > From beginning to end , there is narration by " 's recognizable voice . 's character , , is a white - trash 31 - year - old waitress in a diner . is , a boxing gym owner who has trained many promising fighters but has never been able to take them all the way to a title / money bout . decides to pursue her dream of becoming a boxer once she realizes she 's in a real dead - end situation . is skeptical about women fighters , tells she 's too old to start training , and tells her he wo n't train her . 's character is " " , one of 's ex - fighters . feels guilty because he did n't stop " Scrap " from fighting in his 109th fight . ignored 's pleas to throw in the towel . It was that fight , 25 years ago , that caused him to lose one eye , ending his boxing career . This is how ended up being the caretaker of 's boxing gym . This is also why takes a conservative approach when training upcoming boxers . Although he 's a top notch trainer , he 's afraid to take them to the top -- he 's afraid of what comes with a loss . Thus , we see a boxer leave for a more aggressive manager . is extremely determined to prove wrong , along with the rest of her family . Scrap continues to give pointers on how to improve and get better . is still unwilling to commit to become 's trainer . After much persistence , on her 32nd birthday gets to agree to train her . We also see a minor back story of 's estranged relationship with his daughter " . " We see a few shots of letters writes to his daughter coming back marked , " return to sender " , which he adds to one of many shoe boxes full of such letters in his closet . 's guilt about his daughter is why he goes to church every day -- though we never actually learn specifically why he feels so guilty . does n't have a father ; he died when she was young . Eventually and come together realizing that the other can fill that void in their lives . A year and a half of training and many knock - outs later , wants to go for a world title championship in . is hesitant , not wanting her to get hurt . takes him to see her mother and sister who are very white - trash and live in a trailer . surprises her mom with a new home just a mile away from their current trailer but her mom is angry . If welfare finds out about the house she 'll stop getting her checks . On the way back , they stop at a roadside diner that was her father 's favorite . She tells loving stories about her father . She tells him about the time he put their ailing pet dog out of his misery . By the way , loves this diner 's lemon pie . He contemplates buying the diner . finally decides that is ready for the next level . He sets up a series of fights against skilled British and European opponents . Before entering the ring the first time , he gives her a new fight robe with a Gaelic phrase on it . He wo n't tell her what it means . The crowd loves it and chants it as she enters the ring . ( Important later . ) Maggie wins every fight easily , which sets her on the path to a championship bout . In the championship fight , boxes against the current middleweight champion . The title holder is not only aggressive and tough but also fights dirty . During the first two rounds she pounds on while taking a couple of penalty points for two foul punches . The referee warns her that next time she will be disqualified . The next couple of rounds takes a different approach , advised by , and starts to break ground . She clearly is winning the fight and the crowd goes crazy . She goes back in and after a few punches and almost - a - knock - out later , her opponent struggles to her feet after a 9 - count . The referee sends them back to their corners . turns her back and before she can reach her corner , her opponent moves toward her while the referee is n't looking . She takes a deadly shot at 's blind side and sends her landing on her head on the corner stool , breaking her neck . suffers spinal neck injury that leaves her paralyzed for life . The last 1/4 of the movie is about euthanasia and human morals . is bedridden for a long time and eventually has to have her leg amputated due to bed sores turning gangrenous . 's family arrives at a nearby hotel , and after first spending a week visiting and other tourist destinations , they try to get her to sign a legal document placing her assets in her mother 's control . is skeptical but they tell him to mind his own business . He leaves , disgusted at them . tells them to leave and that she never wants to see them again . Then asks for a favor . She asks if he remembers the story she told him about her father and their dog . She no longer wants to live . She had her chance at glory and wants to die remembering the crowd cheering her name . refuses . Later is awoken in the middle of the night . has bitten her tongue , hoping to bleed to death . The doctors save her and stitch her tongue back up . She rips the stitches out and tries it again . This time they cover her tongue so she ca n't get to it . now realizes how badly she wants to die and contemplates " slowly killing " her by letting her live or end her life while she is " living . " Scrap tells him that most people die wondering " what if " and never having a chance at anything . He tells him that at least had her shot of a lifetime and is thinking " maybe I did alright . "Frankie decides to fulfill her wishes and end her life . He walks into her room , unnoticed . He tells her what he 's going to do and she can only smile . He tells her that the Gaelic phrase embroidered on her robe and chanted by her fans means " my darling ; my blood " . He removes her breathing tube and injects her with adrenaline . She dies instantly . In the end of the movie we see writing a letter ( to 's daughter ) and we realize that the narration all along has been this letter . He ends it along the lines of " ... He never returned to the gym and I never saw him again . I 'm sure he 's somewhere between here and there but wherever he is , I 'm sure he 's doing just fine . I just wanted to let you know what kind of man was . I wanted to let you know what your father was like . "The final shot is of eating pie at the diner that had taken him to . We 're meant to presume that he retired from running the gym and bought the diner , as he told he might like to do someday.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > takes his little sister 's shoes to the shoemaker to be repaired , but loses them on the way home . The siblings decide to keep the predicament a secret from their parents , knowing that there is no money to buy a replacement pair and fearing that they will be punished . They devise a scheme to share 's sneakers : will wear them to school in the morning and hand them off to at midday so he can attend afternoon classes . This uncomfortable arrangement leads to one adventure after another as they attempt to hide the plan from their parents and teachers , attend to their schoolwork and errands , and acquire a new pair of shoes for . sees the shoes on a schoolmate 's feet , and follows her home , but the two soon become friends . enters a high - profile children 's footrace in the hope of receiving the third prize of a new pair of sneakers . He accidentally places first and wins another prize instead . The film ends with finding out that she will not get a new pair of shoes , but there is a quick shot of their father 's bicycle at the end of the movie that shows what appears to be the red shoes had been focusing on earlier and another pair of white sneakers , presumably for , whose old sneakers were torn from so much use . The film ends with the final shot showing blisters on 's feet . Some versions include an epilogue revealing that eventually achieves the larger - scale success of having a racing career.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > A text crawl after the opening credits explains that in the near future , the technology that created synthetic humans has entered the ' Nexus phase ' : Replicants , sophisticated androids that are virtually identical to humans , are now superior in strength and at least equal in intelligence to their creators . Replicants are designed and built by the , a giant multi - conglomerate headquartered in two pyramid - like towers . The latest and most advanced version of Replicant technology is the 6 model . Replicants are mostly used as slaves for manual labor on the " - " out in space . Following a violent mutiny by Replicants on an - , the androids were outlawed on . Specialized police units , " Runners " , are charged with the difficult task of detecting Replicants who illegally come to . If found , Replicants are executed , which is not considered murder but euphemistically called " retirement . "The opening title sets the story in in , 2019 . and the surrounding area have become heavily industrialized , crowded with people , and rain falls constantly . Apart from ground traffic , there are flying personal vehicles called ' spinners ' soaring through the sky . At the , a , ( ) , is interviewing a new employee using a special device called a - ( ) analyzer . The machine is designed to detect any physical responses in the test subject in response to questions that are deliberately meant to affect the subject emotionally . After a few questions , the man being tested , ( ) , becomes obviously agitated and eventually hostile , shooting . ( ) , a former , is eating on the street at a Japanese noodle bar when another man , ( ) , tells him he 's under arrest . tries to ignore the man but when he hears that a man called ' ' is asking for him , he eventually agrees to come . flies by spinner to police headquarters and delivers to his old boss , ( ) . tells that there are four " skin jobs " ( the derogatory term for Replicants ) loose on the streets , and he needs to retire them . suggests giving the job to , but says they already did that : " he can breathe okay , as long as nobody unplugs him . " is not interested and tries to leave , but successfully pressures him into accepting with a veiled threat . They watch footage of 's VK test as explains that six murdered 23 people on an - colony and then stole a shuttle to . Two of them were killed three days before by a high - voltage security fence while trying to break into the , the other four have survived and disappeared . Suspecting that they might try to infiltrate the , was tasked with testing their new employees , and nearly died after identifying one . Why the Replicants risked returning to the remains a mystery . Bryant shows Deckard their files . The leader is ( ) , the most advanced and intelligent of the group . The others are ( ) , a trained - assassin ; ( ) , a ' pleasure model ' ( probably used for prostitution ) ; and , the who shot . also tells that although the Nexus-6s are designed without emotions , they are believed to be advanced enough to develop these themselves within years , including hate and anger . As a fail - safe , the scientists designed the to have only a four - year lifespan . sends to 's headquarters to test the machine on one of their Nexus-6s , but wonders if their design might make them impossible to detect . and fly to headquarters . While awaits , he is welcomed by ( ) , a beautiful woman and 's personal assistant . ( ) appears and questions about the - test , doubting its ability to distinguish Replicants from humans . Tyrell offers as a test subject , saying he wants to see a negative test result on a human before providing a to be tested . asks over 100 test questions before the machine finally alerts him that she is a . Tyrell asks to leave . is surprised , because it usually takes 20 to 30 questions to identify a normal Replicant ; reveals that is unaware that she is one , although she may be beginning to suspect . He explains that Replicants may become emotionally unstable because of the short time they have to learn basic experiences . is an experimental Replicant who has been designed with implanted memories ; the memories serve as a buffer for the emotions , which allows Replicants to better control their behavior . proceeds to the personal address that gave in his VK test . In his apartment , he finds a stack of family photographs there , as well as a scale from an animal 's hide . He is not aware that is watching the police from a short distance . Not far away , is waiting on the street for to return from his apartment . appears and tells that there were policemen there and he was unable to retrieve his photographs . is perturbed but takes with him to a shop called , owned by a Chinese man named ( ) , who engineers Replicants ' eyes for . He is confronted in his subzero lab by and , the latter of whom rips open 's thermal coat to make it easier for to interrogate him . asks about " incept dates , " the date marking a 's first activation and beginning of their four year lifespan . Chew , quickly freezing to death , has no knowledge about that , and desperately tells them that they need to talk to Tyrell about increasing their lifespans . suggests that meeting with will be difficult , but tells him that a employee , , may be able to gain access . takes 's stack of photos home with him . He is surprised by in the elevator . , seemingly feeling caught off - guard , is quite rude to , who learned what revealed to about her , but refused to see her afterwards . She has come to debunk his claims , and shows a picture of herself with her mother . insensitively quashes 's insistence that she has an actual past , giving her detailed descriptions of several of her ' childhood memories ' . He tells her that these have been taken from other people , especially 's nieces . She is extremely hurt and starts crying , so fetches her a drink , but she has left by the time he is back . In another part of , near an old , neglected hotel called the , a woman walks into an alley and covers herself with waste paper to keep warm . She dozes for a bit until a man approaches her and startles her awake . She runs away , breaking the window of his van , but the man kindly returns one of her bags and she becomes friendly . The woman is revealed to be , one of the is pursuing . The man is ( ) , a genetic designer for the and the person told to find . agrees to stay at 's hotel , where he lives alone and designs lifelike toys and dolls . tells him that she is an orphan , but she has a few friends who may come over . In his apartment while drinking , examines his old photographs on his piano . In the and 's editions , he briefly dreams of a white unicorn . When he awakens , he analyzes one of 's photographs in a scanning device , and finds that a girl , probably , is visible in a back room . notes that she has a prominent tattoo in her neck of a looped serpent . visits the crowded streets near and has a old Asian woman examine the animal scale . believes it to be from a fish but it 's from a snake and , like most animals of the time period , is artificial . A serial number is also visible under the ; it identifies the maker as a man named ( ) , whose shop is right up the street . confronts , who tells him he has made a snake for a club owned by ( ) . goes to the club and unsuccessfully tries to pressure into identifying the girl in 's picture . He places a quick call to , apologizing for his insensitivity and asking her if she 'd like to join him at the club . refuses , saying it is not her kind of place . finds that poses as an exotic dancer named at the club , and she uses an artificial snake during her performances . After the show , poses as an irritating union representative , claiming to investigate abuses by club owners who may spy on female performers in their dressing rooms through peepholes drilled into the walls . sees through 's ruse , beats him violently and is almost at the point of killing him , until she is disturbed by a few other dancers entering the room . She dashes from the club into the overcrowded streets , trying to hide in traffic . quickly catches up and chases her until he 's able to shoot her . crashes through several plate glass windows and falls to the street , dead . identifies himself to the police that respond to the incident and when a passerby examines , they see the snake tattoo under her ear . arrives on the scene and talks to , congratulating him for finding and retiring . He tells that there are four more Replicants to retire ; insists that there are only three left . tells him that has disappeared , so now has to retire her as well . Deckard leaves , and spots her a few moments later across the street . As he follows her , he 's suddenly grabbed by , who knocks his pistol away and beats him severely . When says " Wake up ! Time to die ! " , and is poised to stab his fingers through 's eyes , his forehead explodes ; he has been shot by using 's own pistol . returns to his apartment and joins him . seems to have accepted the truth about herself , and appears to be much more sympathetic toward her since she saved him from . He gives her a drink and as he cleans himself up , she asks him if he 'd hunt her down , should she disappear to the north ; he tells her he would n't , but someone else surely would . She asks if he knows more about her incept date and her lifespan , but says that he did n't look at them . asks him if he has ever tried the test on himself , but has fallen asleep on his couch . starts playing on his piano . wakes up , and the two play together . says she remembers piano lessons , but these memories are probably 's niece 's , not hers . becomes more amorous , but gets insecure and rejects his advances . prevents her from leaving his apartment ; she admits that she does n't know how to make love , so ' instructs ' her step by step , and they make love . wakes up in 's apartment . She talks to her host about his strange skin condition , " syndrome , " which makes him age quickly -- he is only 25 , but his wrinkled skin makes him look much older . It is the reason why he ca n't leave for an - colony , but he does n't mind . Suddenly , appears , summoned there by . He sadly shares the news that and are both retired . and reveal to that they are both Nexus-6s and they need his help . proves to that she 's artificial by grabbing an egg from boiling water and tossing it to , who finds it too hot to handle . They claim to have a similar disease as he does , accelerated aging ; will need help , or she 'll die . says that he only does genetic design , but notices that plays chess and asks him about his opponent , who is himself . gently coerces to use his connection to Tyrell to arrange a personal meeting . reluctantly agrees . and go to 's pyramidal home and take an elevator to his penthouse . They are stopped as a security measure , but are allowed to proceed when Sebastian voices two moves to Tyrell himself that win the chess match they 'd been playing ; the last move is given to him by . Tyrell is fascinated by the bold move , and invites in . In 's bedchamber , introduces , but seems to have been expecting for some time . confronts his creator , saying specifically that he wants an extension of his short lifespan , and calls " father . " ( In the 1982 and 1992 's editions , says " fucker " in place of father . ) Tyrell explains that he is unable to do that ; once an artificial being like has been completed , it is impossible to make any alterations in its lifecycle . proposes several biological interventions to prolong his lifespan , but Tyrell dismisses all of them as ineffective , saying that they have made him as well they could , though not to last . becomes despondent , but Tyrell comforts him , saying that " the light that burns twice as bright burns half as long , and you have burned so very very brightly " . tells he 's done " questionable things " , but 's pride seems too big for him to care , focusing on the extraordinary things has done . , still despondent , first kisses , then begins to crush his skull , poking his thumbs through his creator 's eyes . Tyrell falls dead , as the horrified watches . then goes after as well . is in his car on the streets , moving it when some street people climb on the back , apparently hoping to scavenge parts they can sell . He receives a report from , who tells him that is dead and has been found dead at the same scene . places a call to 's apartment , claiming to be a friend . answers the call but hangs up without a word . drives to 's apartment and searches for evidence or leads . As searches the cluttered mess of puppets and mannequins , he is surprised by a disguised , who assaults him using acrobatics . As she performs a series of flips to finish off , he shoots her through the abdomen . She spasms violently for a few moments before shoots her twice more and finally kills her . hears arrive , and takes up position in a nearby room . comes in and finds dead . He weeps and and kisses her lifeless lips . He enters the next room ; shoots at him but misses . chides him that he 's " not being very sporting to fire on an unarmed opponent . " A game of cat - and - mouse starts , with stalking throughout the apartment . At one point , he seizes 's hand through a wall and deliberately breaks two of his fingers , in retaliation for and . He gives him the gun back and releases his hand , but finds it impossible to shoot straight with two broken fingers . gives him a few seconds head - start to flee . escapes to an upper floor in the building , but is easily found by when he howls in pain from trying to reset his fingers . keeps moving , but is in great pain and drops his gun . is already showing signs of his own impending death -- he stabs himself through the hand with a large nail to temporarily stabilize his condition . seizes an opportunity to beat with a large pipe but he can not incapacitate , whose superhuman strength is too much for . eventually escapes onto a window ledge and climbs to the roof , but appears moments later , holding a white dove he found on the roof . tries to escape by jumping to another roof across the street , but barely makes it to the ledge . He nearly plummets , hanging on by one hand . makes the jump quite easily and peers over the ledge at , saying " Quite an experience to live in fear , is n't it ? That 's what it is to be a slave " . slips and catches his arm with one hand , pulling him up to safety . sits down near him , and tells that he 's seen more in his short life than most humans would see in a full lifetime . is saddened by the idea that all the memories he 's acquired will be lost " like tears in rain . " Then , echoing the last thing said to , says " time to die " -- but he 's referring to himself . As he finally dies , the dove in his hand flies off . In the ( 2007 ) , the rain continues and the dove flies toward an overcast sky . In the original theatrical version ( 1982 ) , the rain has stopped and the dove flies toward a clear blue sky . muses that he does n't know why saved him ; perhaps he had a newfound love for life , including 's . He notes that the Replicants only wanted the same answers that humans do about life : where do we come from and how long it lasts . meets on the roof and throws his pistol back to him . He congratulates on completing his investigation ; tells him he 's officially finished with hunting Replicants . As walks away , he looks back over his shoulder , and yells , " It 's too bad she wo n't live , but then again , who does ? " , referring to . returns to his apartment and is alarmed to find the door ajar . He takes out his gun and calls . When she does n't answer he walks through the rooms with his gun drawn . In the bedroom , is completely covered by the bed linens . He fears that she is dead . Much to his relief , she wakes up when he pulls the sheet back and touches her . He asks her whether she loves and trusts him ; she replies that she does . A few minutes later , she is dressed and , after checking the lobby outside his apartment , motions for her to join him in the elevator . On the floor of the lobby is a small origami unicorn , left there by . 's words about not living echo in 's head . He realizes that was there but let live . studies the unicorn for a moment , then crushes it in his hand . In the and 's ( 1992 ) editions , the film ends when the elevator doors close . In the edition , and drive into a sun - lit and mountainous area , and explains in voice - over that told him that was special , and has no termination date . Echoing 's sentiment atop the roof , he muses , " I did n't know how long we had together ... who does?"</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > It is in the middle of the . A ( ) searches the tundra for gold . But he finds more than gold ; he finds love , and an uproarious adventure that forever change the lives of the people he meets . The barges into the only cabin in sight during a blizzard and starts gnawing on an old bone left by occupant ( ) . tries to eject the , but another " lone prospector , " ( ) also is soon blown into the now - crowded cabin . As the men starve , they cut a deck of cards to see who will go for help and food . Since draws a deuce of ( to the 's three of spades , and 's jack of clubs ) , he must leave , taking his dog with him . In subsequent , unconnected scenes , we see the wanted gun down two lawmen who recognize him , taking their food and dog team , and discovering 's lucky strike claim . Meanwhile , back at the cabin , the starving starts to hallucinate that the smaller is a giant chicken , and eventually attacks him by shotgun and knife . All this , despite the fact that the has boiled his right shoe and served the " upper " ( while settling for the nail - ridden sole , himself ) . Just as things are getting out of hand , a bear barges into the cabin , and the presumably shoots it after it has lumbered back out , solving the prospector 's hunger issues . Soon they part ways . Big is shown finding working his gold strike . When remonstrates , brains him with a shovel and flees , but quickly falls to his death when a snow ledge breaks off into a chasm . Meanwhile , the has stumbled into a town and sold his pick and ax , but still sports just one shoe ( with his right foot swaddled in cloth ) . He enters the local " " dance hall , and is smitten with one of the dance hall girls , , who herself is being pursued by " ladies ' man " . The finds a souvenir photo torn by and discarded on the floor by , and conceals it in his clothing . Meanwhile , does not like 's raucous behavior , so she dances with the to spite . After this dance , accosts , who flees to a dressing room . When the prevents from following , the bigger man blinds the by pulling his derby down over his eyes . While the is temporarily sightless , a hanging clock falls to cold - cock , and the LP leaves the dance hall , thinking he 's won the fight . The next morning , an again hungry bamboozles cabin - owning prospector ( ) into feeding him coffee and beans . Soon appoints the to be his cabin - sitter as and his partner return to their own claim . Shortly thereafter , and three friends have a snowball fight outside the front door of this cabin ( which is within earshot of the dance hall ) , which ends with the getting hit in the face with a snowball as he opens his front door . The quartet of dance hall girls come in for a minute , and while the goes for more firewood , discovers the torn picture of herself under his pillow . Upon his return , one of 's colleagues gives the an inadvertent " hot - foot " by discarding a match on his right foot after lighting a cigarette . When the fire is extinguished , the invites the girls to come back and promises they will return at 8 p.m. ' . A deliriously - happy LP has a pillow fight with himself in the midst of a gymnastics routine after the quartet leaves , so finds him looking like a giant chicken for real when she comes back a moment later for her forgotten gloves . In order to get money for his upcoming party , the LP shovels the same pile of snow in front of several town businesses , demanding a higher shovel - out fee from each successive business owner . 's comes , and the has his cabin decorated , with the table set for five , and party hats plus wrapped presents at the places reserved for his four female guests . He imagines being asked for a speech , to which he instead responds with the ( now - famous ) " roll dance " ( in which he pretends two rolls skewered with forks are little legs and feet dancing on the table in front of himself ) . Meanwhile , back at the dance hall , the clock strikes midnight , the is long - forgotten , fires a few pistol shots into the ceiling , and a mob of prospectors and dance hall girls sing " " before breaking out to dance to " in the . " The commotion wakens the heart - broken , who wanders down toward the noise . Meanwhile , the dance hall girls finally remember their " date " with the , and the quartet walks up to the cabin with , who plans to scare his former rival . Finding the cabin empty , forces himself upon , who slaps him in the face . Back at the dance hall , writes a note of apology to , saying she loves him , and sends it down from her balcony to on the main floor via messenger . The now - dismissive spies the in the crowd , and tells a barman to deliver the note -- which lacks the name of an addressee -- to the . A no - longer crestfallen tries to get to in the balcony , but Big ( who has amnesia since brained him with a shovel , preventing him from remembering the location of his " mountain of gold " ) , grabs the first and says he 'll make him a millionaire within a month if the can guide him back to the cabin in which they met . The LP races up the balcony to hug a startled , and then rushes into the next scene , in which he and return to the cabin , better - provisioned than previously . Overnight , another blizzard blows this cabin right to 's claim and beyond -- half over a cliff . In the morning , and the awake to a teeter - totter experience lasting many tense minutes , before the is roped out of the cabin by as it 's falling into a chasm . The final scene finds and the as millionaires on a ship departing . As settles into their suite for a manicure , the humors the news media by changing from his morning suit into his old mining clothes and shoe . Meanwhile , an unknowing lurks on the deck below , confined to steerage . A ship 's officer tells her to be on the look - out for a stowaway . Just then , a press photographer causes the to fall backwards , landing at 's feet . Before the can say anything to , who assumes he 's the stowaway , the ship 's officer returns to apprehend the presumed wrong - doer . pleads for mercy , digging into her pocket to pay the " stowaways " steerage fare . By then the ship 's captain and media have arrived in to explain the is really a " multi - millionaire . " The tells the ship 's steward to prepare room for in his luxury suite , and as they pose for a press photo on the first - class deck , the gives a lingering kiss . ( By now she is presumably his fiancee . ) The end.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The film starts with meeting on a train from and striking up a conversation with her . is going to to catch a flight back to the , whereas is returning to university in after visiting her grandmother . When they reach , convinces to disembark with him , saying that 10 or 20 years down the road , she might not be happy with her marriage and might wonder how her life would have been different if she had picked another guy , and this is a chance to realize that he himself is not that different from the rest ; in his words , he is " the same boring , unmotivated guy . " has to catch a flight early in the morning and does not have enough money to rent a room for the night , so they decide to roam around in . After visiting a few landmarks in , they share a kiss at the top of the ferris wheel at sunset and start to feel a romantic connection . As they continue to roam around the city , they begin to talk more openly with each other , with conversations ranging from topics about love , life , religion , and their observations of the city . tells that her last boyfriend broke up with her six months ago , claiming that she " loved him too much " . When questioned , reveals he had initially come to to spend time with his girlfriend who was studying in , but they had broken up when she was avoiding him while he was there . He decided to take a cheap flight out of , out of , but it did n't leave for two weeks so he bought a pass and traveled around . When they are walking alongside a canal they are approached by a man who , instead of begging , offers to write them a poem with a word of their choice in it . and decide on the word " milkshake " , and are soon presented with the ( written for the film by the poet a cafe , and stage fake phone conversations with each other , playing each others ' friends they pretend to call . Cline reveals that she was ready to get off the train with before he convinced her . reveals that after he broke up with his girlfriend , he bought a flight that really was n't much cheaper , and all he really wanted was an escape from his life . They admit their attraction to each other and how the night has made them feel , though they understand that they probably wo n't see each other again when they leave . They simply decide to make the best of what time they have left , ending the night with the implication of a sexual encounter between them . At that point , explains that if given the choice , he 'd marry her instead of never seeing her again . The film ends the next day at the train station , where the two hastily agree to meet together at the same place in six months as the train is about to leave.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The film begins with a letter being delivered . We follow the letter as it makes its way through the post office system until it finally reaches the of the . It 's a summons for one of the students , ( ) . 's father is the head of the academy and has enrolled in the hopes of teaching him about responsibility . , however , is a selfish brat and prefers to spend his time lounging in his luxurious tent . 's overall performance is deemed abysmal by the drill sergeant ; he 's completely careless with delivering mail . His father deduces that is doing this intentionally because he wants a different " punishment . " So he announces that is officially a postman and will be stationed in a small town named . He also gives him an ultimatum : deliver 6,000 letters in a year , or he will be cut off from the family . is depressingly gray and cold . When arrives , the sarcastic ferryman ( ) tells him to ring the bell in the town square so he can receive a welcome reception . When he does so , a huge brawl breaks out between the townspeople . Turns out that the bell is known as " The . " The town is divided into two clans ; The and the , who have been fighting with each other for many years . manages to hide in a nearby schoolhouse . He meets the school teacher ( ) . Parents refuse to send their children to school ( They do n't want their kids interacting with the opposite clan ) , so she 's been forced to sell fish . She 's been saving up her earnings so she can finally leave . The ferryman finds and leads him to his new home : the dilapidated post office , full of snow and chickens . A boy sledding nearby throws a snowball at and calls him a loser . The next morning , goes out to collect letters but finds none . He tries to ask the townspeople for their mail , but they 're too busy fighting and pranking each other . At one house , a young boy 's drawing lands at 's feet . He offers to " mail " it back , but the boy 's father chases him off . Two weeks later , has had no luck . However , there 's still one house he has n't tried yet : the woodsman , ( ) , who lives far out of town . The home is empty , so lets himself in . In the basement , he finds hundreds of hand made toys . returns , and runs off , dropping his satchel . The boy 's drawing from earlier falls out , and picks it up , curious . attempts to leave but is stopped by . He wants to know where the boy lives . takes him the boy 's home , but the package wants him to leave is too big for the mailbox , and the yard is full of traps . He ends up being launched up and down into the chimney ( courtesy of ) . leaves the present and runs off , but stays behind to watch the boy unwrap it and play with the toy . The next morning , is surprised to see several children outside his house . The boy told everyone about ' visit , and now they all want to mail letters to him , asking for toys . immediately starts handing out paper and pencils to the children and encourages them to make their letters sound sad . He makes a chart on the wall to keep track of how many letters he delivers . Jesper returns to ' home , where the woodsman is hanging birdhouses in the trees . He shows him letters and convinces him to donate the toys in his basement . agrees . The boy is playing with his toy in the yard , and a little girl joins him . Their parents see this and quickly separate the two since they are from opposite clans . The children are brought to the clan leaders : ( ) and ( ) . They are told that the clans are not meant to mingle , and the reason they keep fighting with each other is because of tradition . The kids promise that it wo n't happen again , but is wary . Word begins to spread amongst the children about and how he comes down the chimney at night and leaves toys behind ( and that he likes cookies ) . In reality , has been the one delivering the presents while just tags along . At one of the houses , realizes the boy who threw a snowball at him from earlier lives there and leaves a lump of coal in his stocking . At the post office , a girl named tries to ask for a present , but since she does n't speak , ignores her . A few of the children tell him they do n't know how to write , so he decides to send them to ( since she 's the schoolteacher).Alva , however , is not happy about this new development because she 's so close to being able to leave . The children insist on learning how to write their names , so she starts taking money out of her savings for school supplies . Meanwhile , the number of presents has increased so drastically that 's horse ca n't pull the wagon anymore . gets the idea to wrangle up some nearby reindeer , which makes the wagon go faster . The snowball boy confronts the following morning , demanding why he 's been getting coal instead of presents . On the spot , says that sees everything that the children do , and if they are naughty , they wo n't get presents . The children start doing good deeds in hopes of staying in ' good graces . They clean up the town and act nicer to their neighbors . Their acts of kindness start to inspire the adults to do so as well . is able to stop selling fish and start teaching . Soon the town is much happier , and everyone is getting along . But and are n't happy with the changes . They realize is responsible for this and must be stopped . is happy to hear that the town is doing better . He remarks , " A true selfless act always sparks another . " is n't convinced , however . He believes everyone is always out to get something . and attempt to ambush them , but is able to maneuver them safely away . The wagon loses its wheels in the process , and they end up ramping over a cliff side . A boy looks out his window and sees the sleigh and reindeer airborne . The next morning , rumor has spread that has flying reindeer . This makes him laugh for the first time ( " - ho - ho!").Mr . and decide to meet late at night in the town square . The numbers of their clans are dwindling because of all the kind deeds . proposes a temporary truce so they can finally put a stop to . agrees , and the two shake hands . The truce is temporarily broken ; however , when someone accidentally rings the " , " which starts another brawl . notices that they are running low on toys . He gets the idea to make a huge delivery on , and can make more . claims he does n't do so anymore , but keeps insisting that they can turn ' home into a workshop . In his excitement , he accidentally finds a decorative shelf of the woodsman , a young woman ( his wife ) , and several empty holes . angrily orders to leave . Jesper returns to the post office and finds waiting for him . He finally takes her to so they can write her letter to in . She wants a sled with a sail . brings the letter to ' home and starts to make it , but it looks very poor . eventually takes pity and helps him . They bring the present to 's village ( just slightly out of town ) and leave it outside her tent . This time , stays behind with and watches her unwrap and play with the sled with her parents . Back at the house , finally talks about his wife , . They moved away from the village because they wanted to start a family . While they waited , he starting making toys . Sadly , they never had children , and died of an illness . He kept making birdhouses because of her love of birds . thanks for bringing joy back into his life and decides to go forward with the plan , even planning for the years to come . is hesitant because he still wants to leave , but he ca n't bring himself to tell the truth . He stops by the schoolhouse and is surprised to see it , and completely transformed , more so that used up all her savings . She brings him the town square which has been completely decorated for and all the townspeople are mingling with one another . and break into the post office and find 's chart of letters delivered . They begin making several fake letters and put them on ' boat since he handles all the outgoing mail . brings her entire village to ' workshop to help prepare for the big night . brings to the workshop and starts to consider possibly settling down in . has arrived . The village have remodeled 's sleigh and give a new red outfit . The good mood is broken when 's father arrives ; and invited him because over 14,000 letters have been delivered . Since he held up his end of the deal , he can go home now . and are disappointed to learn about 's real intentions . At the docks , tells 's father that his son is the first postman to leave unhappy ; usually , the postmen that leave are the happiest . arrives seemingly too late , but it turns out did n't leave on the boat ! He told his father the truth and was allowed to stay . On the mountain top , he notices the clans carrying torches towards ' home . As the sleigh is being loaded with presents , the clans arrive to destroy them . Once kids stop receiving toys , they 'll eventually start fighting again , which will make the grown - ups fight again as well . jumps on the sleigh and tries to make a getaway , but it 's not connected , so they sleigh rolls downhill . The clans chase after them down the hillside . refuses to help because he 's still mad at . The bag is ripped , and toys begin to fall out . frantically apologizes while trying to close the bag . 's gargantuan daughter , , almost falls to her death , but she 's saved by 's son . manages to stop the sleigh from going over the cliff side . Still , spitefully rips the bag further , and the presents fall . insists that the town will always be miserable as long as they 're in charge . Still , disagrees : a true act of goodwill always sparks another . To prove his point , and are no longer enemies , much to their parents ' shock . Turns out , the presents on the sleigh were just logs of firewood covered in wrapping paper . The real presents were back at the workshop safe . found about the plan because the children told her about it at school , and she , in turn , told . Officially forgiven , and depart to deliver the presents . morning arrives , and the children eagerly open their presents . On a nearby hill , and sit and listen . Life continues to improve in . and get married , which makes and in - laws . and marry and later have two children . ' present operation continues growing bigger and further . and remain friends until 12 years later when disappears to be with his wife . In the epilogue , kisses his children and goodnight and sits down in front of the fireplace by the tree . He hears the sound of sleigh bells and smiles , ready to see his old friend > 

 < synopsis > The film begins with a letter being delivered . We follow the letter as it makes its way through the post office system until it finally reaches the of the . It 's a summons for one of the students , ( ) . 's father is the head of the academy and has enrolled in the hopes of teaching him about responsibility . , however , is a selfish brat and prefers to spend his time lounging in his luxurious tent . 's overall performance is deemed abysmal by the drill sergeant ; he 's completely careless with delivering mail . His father deduces that is doing this intentionally because he wants a different " punishment . " So he announces that is officially a postman and will be stationed in a small town named . He also gives him an ultimatum : deliver 6,000 letters in a year , or he will be cut off from the family . is depressingly gray and cold . When arrives , the sarcastic ferryman ( ) tells him to ring the bell in the town square so he can receive a welcome reception . When he does so , a huge brawl breaks out between the townspeople . Turns out that the bell is known as " The . " The town is divided into two clans ; The and the , who have been fighting with each other for many years . manages to hide in a nearby schoolhouse . He meets the school teacher ( ) . Parents refuse to send their children to school ( They do n't want their kids interacting with the opposite clan ) , so she 's been forced to sell fish . She 's been saving up her earnings so she can finally leave . The ferryman finds and leads him to his new home : the dilapidated post office , full of snow and chickens . A boy sledding nearby throws a snowball at and calls him a loser . The next morning , goes out to collect letters but finds none . He tries to ask the townspeople for their mail , but they 're too busy fighting and pranking each other . At one house , a young boy 's drawing lands at 's feet . He offers to " mail " it back , but the boy 's father chases him off . Two weeks later , has had no luck . However , there 's still one house he has n't tried yet : the woodsman , ( ) , who lives far out of town . The home is empty , so lets himself in . In the basement , he finds hundreds of hand made toys . returns , and runs off , dropping his satchel . The boy 's drawing from earlier falls out , and picks it up , curious . attempts to leave but is stopped by . He wants to know where the boy lives . takes him the boy 's home , but the package wants him to leave is too big for the mailbox , and the yard is full of traps . He ends up being launched up and down into the chimney ( courtesy of ) . leaves the present and runs off , but stays behind to watch the boy unwrap it and play with the toy . The next morning , is surprised to see several children outside his house . The boy told everyone about ' visit , and now they all want to mail letters to him , asking for toys . immediately starts handing out paper and pencils to the children and encourages them to make their letters sound sad . He makes a chart on the wall to keep track of how many letters he delivers . Jesper returns to ' home , where the woodsman is hanging birdhouses in the trees . He shows him letters and convinces him to donate the toys in his basement . agrees . The boy is playing with his toy in the yard , and a little girl joins him . Their parents see this and quickly separate the two since they are from opposite clans . The children are brought to the clan leaders : ( ) and ( ) . They are told that the clans are not meant to mingle , and the reason they keep fighting with each other is because of tradition . The kids promise that it wo n't happen again , but is wary . Word begins to spread amongst the children about and how he comes down the chimney at night and leaves toys behind ( and that he likes cookies ) . In reality , has been the one delivering the presents while just tags along . At one of the houses , realizes the boy who threw a snowball at him from earlier lives there and leaves a lump of coal in his stocking . At the post office , a girl named tries to ask for a present , but since she does n't speak , ignores her . A few of the children tell him they do n't know how to write , so he decides to send them to ( since she 's the schoolteacher).Alva , however , is not happy about this new development because she 's so close to being able to leave . The children insist on learning how to write their names , so she starts taking money out of her savings for school supplies . Meanwhile , the number of presents has increased so drastically that 's horse ca n't pull the wagon anymore . gets the idea to wrangle up some nearby reindeer , which makes the wagon go faster . The snowball boy confronts the following morning , demanding why he 's been getting coal instead of presents . On the spot , says that sees everything that the children do , and if they are naughty , they wo n't get presents . The children start doing good deeds in hopes of staying in ' good graces . They clean up the town and act nicer to their neighbors . Their acts of kindness start to inspire the adults to do so as well . is able to stop selling fish and start teaching . Soon the town is much happier , and everyone is getting along . But and are n't happy with the changes . They realize is responsible for this and must be stopped . is happy to hear that the town is doing better . He remarks , " A true selfless act always sparks another . " is n't convinced , however . He believes everyone is always out to get something . and attempt to ambush them , but is able to maneuver them safely away . The wagon loses its wheels in the process , and they end up ramping over a cliff side . A boy looks out his window and sees the sleigh and reindeer airborne . The next morning , rumor has spread that has flying reindeer . This makes him laugh for the first time ( " - ho - ho!").Mr . and decide to meet late at night in the town square . The numbers of their clans are dwindling because of all the kind deeds . proposes a temporary truce so they can finally put a stop to . agrees , and the two shake hands . The truce is temporarily broken ; however , when someone accidentally rings the " , " which starts another brawl . notices that they are running low on toys . He gets the idea to make a huge delivery on , and can make more . claims he does n't do so anymore , but keeps insisting that they can turn ' home into a workshop . In his excitement , he accidentally finds a decorative shelf of the woodsman , a young woman ( his wife ) , and several empty holes . angrily orders to leave . Jesper returns to the post office and finds waiting for him . He finally takes her to so they can write her letter to in . She wants a sled with a sail . brings the letter to ' home and starts to make it , but it looks very poor . eventually takes pity and helps him . They bring the present to 's village ( just slightly out of town ) and leave it outside her tent . This time , stays behind with and watches her unwrap and play with the sled with her parents . Back at the house , finally talks about his wife , . They moved away from the village because they wanted to start a family . While they waited , he starting making toys . Sadly , they never had children , and died of an illness . He kept making birdhouses because of her love of birds . thanks for bringing joy back into his life and decides to go forward with the plan , even planning for the years to come . is hesitant because he still wants to leave , but he ca n't bring himself to tell the truth . He stops by the schoolhouse and is surprised to see it , and completely transformed , more so that used up all her savings . She brings him the town square which has been completely decorated for and all the townspeople are mingling with one another . and break into the post office and find 's chart of letters delivered . They begin making several fake letters and put them on ' boat since he handles all the outgoing mail . brings her entire village to ' workshop to help prepare for the big night . brings to the workshop and starts to consider possibly settling down in . has arrived . The village have remodeled 's sleigh and give a new red outfit . The good mood is broken when 's father arrives ; and invited him because over 14,000 letters have been delivered . Since he held up his end of the deal , he can go home now . and are disappointed to learn about 's real intentions . At the docks , tells 's father that his son is the first postman to leave unhappy ; usually , the postmen that leave are the happiest . arrives seemingly too late , but it turns out did n't leave on the boat ! He told his father the truth and was allowed to stay . On the mountain top , he notices the clans carrying torches towards ' home . As the sleigh is being loaded with presents , the clans arrive to destroy them . Once kids stop receiving toys , they 'll eventually start fighting again , which will make the grown - ups fight again as well . jumps on the sleigh and tries to make a getaway , but it 's not connected , so they sleigh rolls downhill . The clans chase after them down the hillside . refuses to help because he 's still mad at . The bag is ripped , and toys begin to fall out . frantically apologizes while trying to close the bag . 's gargantuan daughter , , almost falls to her death , but she 's saved by 's son . manages to stop the sleigh from going over the cliff side . Still , spitefully rips the bag further , and the presents fall . insists that the town will always be miserable as long as they 're in charge . Still , disagrees : a true act of goodwill always sparks another . To prove his point , and are no longer enemies , much to their parents ' shock . Turns out , the presents on the sleigh were just logs of firewood covered in wrapping paper . The real presents were back at the workshop safe . found about the plan because the children told her about it at school , and she , in turn , told . Officially forgiven , and depart to deliver the presents . morning arrives , and the children eagerly open their presents . On a nearby hill , and sit and listen . Life continues to improve in . and get married , which makes and in - laws . and marry and later have two children . ' present operation continues growing bigger and further . and remain friends until 12 years later when disappears to be with his wife . In the epilogue , kisses his children and goodnight and sits down in front of the fireplace by the tree . He hears the sound of sleigh bells and smiles , ready to see his old friend > 

 < synopsis > The film begins with a letter being delivered . We follow the letter as it makes its way through the post office system until it finally reaches the of the . It 's a summons for one of the students , ( ) . 's father is the head of the academy and has enrolled in the hopes of teaching him about responsibility . , however , is a selfish brat and prefers to spend his time lounging in his luxurious tent . 's overall performance is deemed abysmal by the drill sergeant ; he 's completely careless with delivering mail . His father deduces that is doing this intentionally because he wants a different " punishment . " So he announces that is officially a postman and will be stationed in a small town named . He also gives him an ultimatum : deliver 6,000 letters in a year , or he will be cut off from the family . is depressingly gray and cold . When arrives , the sarcastic ferryman ( ) tells him to ring the bell in the town square so he can receive a welcome reception . When he does so , a huge brawl breaks out between the townspeople . Turns out that the bell is known as " The . " The town is divided into two clans ; The and the , who have been fighting with each other for many years . manages to hide in a nearby schoolhouse . He meets the school teacher ( ) . Parents refuse to send their children to school ( They do n't want their kids interacting with the opposite clan ) , so she 's been forced to sell fish . She 's been saving up her earnings so she can finally leave . The ferryman finds and leads him to his new home : the dilapidated post office , full of snow and chickens . A boy sledding nearby throws a snowball at and calls him a loser . The next morning , goes out to collect letters but finds none . He tries to ask the townspeople for their mail , but they 're too busy fighting and pranking each other . At one house , a young boy 's drawing lands at 's feet . He offers to " mail " it back , but the boy 's father chases him off . Two weeks later , has had no luck . However , there 's still one house he has n't tried yet : the woodsman , ( ) , who lives far out of town . The home is empty , so lets himself in . In the basement , he finds hundreds of hand made toys . returns , and runs off , dropping his satchel . The boy 's drawing from earlier falls out , and picks it up , curious . attempts to leave but is stopped by . He wants to know where the boy lives . takes him the boy 's home , but the package wants him to leave is too big for the mailbox , and the yard is full of traps . He ends up being launched up and down into the chimney ( courtesy of ) . leaves the present and runs off , but stays behind to watch the boy unwrap it and play with the toy . The next morning , is surprised to see several children outside his house . The boy told everyone about ' visit , and now they all want to mail letters to him , asking for toys . immediately starts handing out paper and pencils to the children and encourages them to make their letters sound sad . He makes a chart on the wall to keep track of how many letters he delivers . Jesper returns to ' home , where the woodsman is hanging birdhouses in the trees . He shows him letters and convinces him to donate the toys in his basement . agrees . The boy is playing with his toy in the yard , and a little girl joins him . Their parents see this and quickly separate the two since they are from opposite clans . The children are brought to the clan leaders : ( ) and ( ) . They are told that the clans are not meant to mingle , and the reason they keep fighting with each other is because of tradition . The kids promise that it wo n't happen again , but is wary . Word begins to spread amongst the children about and how he comes down the chimney at night and leaves toys behind ( and that he likes cookies ) . In reality , has been the one delivering the presents while just tags along . At one of the houses , realizes the boy who threw a snowball at him from earlier lives there and leaves a lump of coal in his stocking . At the post office , a girl named tries to ask for a present , but since she does n't speak , ignores her . A few of the children tell him they do n't know how to write , so he decides to send them to ( since she 's the schoolteacher).Alva , however , is not happy about this new development because she 's so close to being able to leave . The children insist on learning how to write their names , so she starts taking money out of her savings for school supplies . Meanwhile , the number of presents has increased so drastically that 's horse ca n't pull the wagon anymore . gets the idea to wrangle up some nearby reindeer , which makes the wagon go faster . The snowball boy confronts the following morning , demanding why he 's been getting coal instead of presents . On the spot , says that sees everything that the children do , and if they are naughty , they wo n't get presents . The children start doing good deeds in hopes of staying in ' good graces . They clean up the town and act nicer to their neighbors . Their acts of kindness start to inspire the adults to do so as well . is able to stop selling fish and start teaching . Soon the town is much happier , and everyone is getting along . But and are n't happy with the changes . They realize is responsible for this and must be stopped . is happy to hear that the town is doing better . He remarks , " A true selfless act always sparks another . " is n't convinced , however . He believes everyone is always out to get something . and attempt to ambush them , but is able to maneuver them safely away . The wagon loses its wheels in the process , and they end up ramping over a cliff side . A boy looks out his window and sees the sleigh and reindeer airborne . The next morning , rumor has spread that has flying reindeer . This makes him laugh for the first time ( " - ho - ho!").Mr . and decide to meet late at night in the town square . The numbers of their clans are dwindling because of all the kind deeds . proposes a temporary truce so they can finally put a stop to . agrees , and the two shake hands . The truce is temporarily broken ; however , when someone accidentally rings the " , " which starts another brawl . notices that they are running low on toys . He gets the idea to make a huge delivery on , and can make more . claims he does n't do so anymore , but keeps insisting that they can turn ' home into a workshop . In his excitement , he accidentally finds a decorative shelf of the woodsman , a young woman ( his wife ) , and several empty holes . angrily orders to leave . Jesper returns to the post office and finds waiting for him . He finally takes her to so they can write her letter to in . She wants a sled with a sail . brings the letter to ' home and starts to make it , but it looks very poor . eventually takes pity and helps him . They bring the present to 's village ( just slightly out of town ) and leave it outside her tent . This time , stays behind with and watches her unwrap and play with the sled with her parents . Back at the house , finally talks about his wife , . They moved away from the village because they wanted to start a family . While they waited , he starting making toys . Sadly , they never had children , and died of an illness . He kept making birdhouses because of her love of birds . thanks for bringing joy back into his life and decides to go forward with the plan , even planning for the years to come . is hesitant because he still wants to leave , but he ca n't bring himself to tell the truth . He stops by the schoolhouse and is surprised to see it , and completely transformed , more so that used up all her savings . She brings him the town square which has been completely decorated for and all the townspeople are mingling with one another . and break into the post office and find 's chart of letters delivered . They begin making several fake letters and put them on ' boat since he handles all the outgoing mail . brings her entire village to ' workshop to help prepare for the big night . brings to the workshop and starts to consider possibly settling down in . has arrived . The village have remodeled 's sleigh and give a new red outfit . The good mood is broken when 's father arrives ; and invited him because over 14,000 letters have been delivered . Since he held up his end of the deal , he can go home now . and are disappointed to learn about 's real intentions . At the docks , tells 's father that his son is the first postman to leave unhappy ; usually , the postmen that leave are the happiest . arrives seemingly too late , but it turns out did n't leave on the boat ! He told his father the truth and was allowed to stay . On the mountain top , he notices the clans carrying torches towards ' home . As the sleigh is being loaded with presents , the clans arrive to destroy them . Once kids stop receiving toys , they 'll eventually start fighting again , which will make the grown - ups fight again as well . jumps on the sleigh and tries to make a getaway , but it 's not connected , so they sleigh rolls downhill . The clans chase after them down the hillside . refuses to help because he 's still mad at . The bag is ripped , and toys begin to fall out . frantically apologizes while trying to close the bag . 's gargantuan daughter , , almost falls to her death , but she 's saved by 's son . manages to stop the sleigh from going over the cliff side . Still , spitefully rips the bag further , and the presents fall . insists that the town will always be miserable as long as they 're in charge . Still , disagrees : a true act of goodwill always sparks another . To prove his point , and are no longer enemies , much to their parents ' shock . Turns out , the presents on the sleigh were just logs of firewood covered in wrapping paper . The real presents were back at the workshop safe . found about the plan because the children told her about it at school , and she , in turn , told . Officially forgiven , and depart to deliver the presents . morning arrives , and the children eagerly open their presents . On a nearby hill , and sit and listen . Life continues to improve in . and get married , which makes and in - laws . and marry and later have two children . ' present operation continues growing bigger and further . and remain friends until 12 years later when disappears to be with his wife . In the epilogue , kisses his children and goodnight and sits down in front of the fireplace by the tree . He hears the sound of sleigh bells and smiles , ready to see his old friend > 

 < synopsis > ( ) once dreamed of being a great prize fighter , but now works at the docks of ( ) , the corrupt boss of the longshoremen 's union . He witnesses a murder by a couple of 's thugs , but wo n't betray , who is both his brother 's ( ) boss and a long - time friend of his family . What he sees at the docks repulses . In an economically depressed environment in which many are out of work , more gather by the docks each morning hoping to secure work for that day than can be hired , placing and his forces in a position to exploit them . Those who complain of the working conditions or wages one day do n't work the next day , or are placed in harm 's way . Consequently , most tolerate being abused . After befriending both the sister ( ) of the murdered man and the local priest ( ) , gradually becomes a man of deeper morality , and starts to speak of acts against , who will soon go on trial . finds his breaking point when his brother is murdered by 's thugs , and causes him to entertain thoughts of testifying against . Still , he struggles to find the courage to do so , until the priest persuades him to . Once he betrays , is without the work that always came his way when he and his brother were trusted and valued associates . Still , he confronts Friendly by the docks and when all the dock workers are witness to the brutal beating of by , they refuse to work unless is also allowed to work . This is the catalyst for a new tone of understanding between the workers and the dock bosses . had neither wanted nor intended to be a hero , but , as a man of principle , he had become not only a hero , but a symbol of the workers ' intolerance of exploitation by the , a former boxer , works as a stevedore on the urban waterfront near . When the story opens , he 's leaving the office / shack of , the head of the local dockworker 's union . tells " You take it from here , . " goes to the tenement of , another dock worker and calls him out , saying that he recovered one of 's carrier pigeons . cautiously accepts and tells to meet him on the roof of the tenement . looks up and sees two shady men waiting on the roof . goes to 's bar and stands outside with his brother , and two of 's enforcers , and . asks him if went to the roof -- referring to him as " The Pigeon " -- and tells him he did . A moment later , a scream is heard and falls from the roof . Though everyone seems to accept that simply slipped and fell , everyone also knows that he was murdered on orders from because had planned to testify to the about unsafe and unfair working conditions in 's local union . himself seems upset that a nice kid like , who was well - liked in the neighborhood , would be killed by 's men when he believed they would simply intimidate him into forgetting about his testimony . Truck and laugh over 's death , calling him a " canary " ( slang for an informant who would betray the union.)In the bar , is still upset . One of 's cronies , Skins , drops by with money for from a payoff and , when the money is counted , he comes up short . viciously searches the man and comes up with the missing money and forcibly throws the man out . When he sees that is upset , he begins to lecture him on how violence is necessary to enforce his rules and keep everyone in line . also admits to ordering 's murder . For setting up , tells his foreman , , to give a cushy job during the next day 's shift at his pier . Out in the alley where was thrown off the roof his sister , , and , the local Catholic priest , look over the body of . angrily pleads with other people in the neighborhood about why , well - liked by his friends and the local kids , would be murdered . Everyone knows , but none of them want to say anything . also becomes angry with , saying he does n't know about the violence in the area because he 's too busy with running his church to actually visit the waterfront . The next day , the dockworkers gather at 's pier . runs a shape - up system where tags are given to selected men to work the ship . is there , with , who tells her that she was right ; he has come down to see just how bad the situation is . 's father , the elderly and cranky , also shows up because he needs to earn money for his son 's funeral . He also gives his dead son 's coat to another worker , " " , who accepts it . While waiting for his name to be called , is approached by two officials from the . One of them recognizes from his boxing days and asks him if he 'll testify to the commission about 's murder and about and his associates . flatly refuses . The other man tells they 'll subpoena him if necessary . calls out the names of men who get regular work , and is among them . The remaining tags are passed out at 's discretion ; when the men who are n't chosen become angry with him , throws the tags behind them and a minor riot breaks out . Pop is pushed out of the crowd by the younger men . When tries to grab a tag for her father , grabs it first and wo n't give it to Edie . When one of the other men points out to that she 's 's sister , he gives her the tag . gives it to her father ; Pop admonishes for letting witness the riot . The other men are disheartened and tells them that no union would ever let what just occurred happen . The men explain how a " trigger local " works : anyone who gets out of line is either ostracized or eliminated by and his goons . They also explain that meetings among union members are impossible since has spies working everywhere . suggests they all meet in the basement of his church . In the ship 's hold , is loafing on a pile of sacks when his brother , " The " , 's right - hand man , finds him and gives him a small job to do . wants to be a spy during the meeting called that night at the church . is reluctant but reminds him that he and have done a lot of favors for . agrees to go . At the church that night , calls the meeting to order , noting that attendance is very low . He explains to the men what they already know : working conditions are bad and their union is powerless as long as it 's run by 's gang . also suggests that if they can talk openly about why was murdered then they 'll make progress . asks 's best friend , , to say something , but he turns her down . tells them that they only way they 'll be able to make better lives for themselves is to stand up to . One of the tougher men in the crowd , , tells that the rule is everyone is " " or " deaf and dumb " about . also notices that is sitting in one of the back pews and recognizes him as 's brother & a spy . Despite his attempts at coaching , is unable to convince the men . As 's fellow priest calls the meeting to an end with a prayer , a window is suddenly smashed in and the rattling of pounding clubs is heard outside : 's men have surrounded the church . Anyone who tries to escape is severely beaten . takes out of the church safely . , while trying to escape , is beaten bloody by 's goons but is rescued by . angrily asks if he still wants to remain and seems to get through to . promises to testify as long as he has 's support . also warns that 's goons wo n't hesitate to lean on a priest as well . says he 'll stay with " Right down the line . "In the park in front of the church , sees that gets out of the area safely . While they talk , a homeless man confronts them , asking for money . The man recognizes both and . When he begins to talk about 's death and how set him up , yells at him to leave . The man does . When she gets home , finds her father packing her things . , a student at an upstate college , had been visiting her family . Pop tells her that she should leave the neighborhood because of the violence she 's seen so far . He also tells her he knows she was with and how is connected to . refuses to leave , driven by her need to know why her brother was killed . On the roof of his building , tends to his flock of carrier pigeons . talks to a couple of kids from the neighborhood , one of them is , who helps with his coop , and sees over at 's coop . goes to her and they talk for a while , about how pigeons are victims of predatory birds in the city , mostly hawks . offers to take out for a drink at a local bar and she accepts . While they talk , she tells of her interest in solving 's murder . warns her stop snooping around too much because it could be dangerous . They dance for a while at a wedding being held in the bar when one of 's men , , tells him that wants to meet with him . tells him he 'll go when he 's ready to . also runs into one of the agents who hands him a subpoena . is still steadfast and tears up the papers , refusing to " eat cheese " ( like a rat would and become an informer).Later , walks home and is stopped by and . asks about the church meeting and tells him it was run by and that very little was discussed that could threaten 's position . counters , telling that had gone to the crime commission and gave a sworn statement about the illicit operations and corruption of 's union . suggests that they use their " muscle " to eliminate . also feels that did n't do his job fully and tells him he wo n't have his cushy job in the yard anymore , that he 's going back to work in the " hole " , the cargo hold of ships where the hard labor is performed . also admonishes about his budding relationship with , saying it 's " unhealthy " for him to be dating the sister of the man they killed . The next day is working alongside in the ship 's hold , unloading crates of Irish whiskey . feels the need to warn about 's intentions but ignores him . As one of the pallets loaded with crates is hoisted out , the crane operator drops it on , killing him in what looks like an accident . Later , after 's body has been uncovered , gives a stirring speech to the entire workforce , telling them that and his men are using them for cheap labor and killing them when they choose to stand up for their rights . 's men begin to throw rotten fruit and cans at , who calmly continues to talk . One of the men , , is about to throw something when stops him and punches him out . One of the men gives 's jacket back to ( she later gives it to ) . 's body is hoisted out of the hold , with and riding the pallet . , whose conscience has been bothering him , meets with . He tells he may just testify to the but he does n't want to implicate his brother or his friends . He also tells the priest that he set up to be killed . tells that his loyalty to and is misplaced and that and are merely using him , as they have all of 's life . He also tells that a good step to take would be to tell what he did . had been coming to see herself and convinces to tell her . meets her and tells her , while a ship 's whistle blows , making what he tells her inaudible . is horrified and runs away . later checks on his pigeons on his roof . He sees one of the men from the who approached him on the docks . asks the advice of one of the boys who hangs out with him on the roof about testifying ; the boy tells him it 's not a good idea to get involved , especially since founded the gang the kid is now a member of . The officer tries to talk to and is mostly unsuccessful until he mentions the fight had boxed in years before involving another man named . is suddenly quite chatty with the man , hinting that he 'd thrown the fight so that , and their friends could win a huge purse by betting on . tells the officer straight out that he could have beaten easily and talks about his technique . Though we do n't hear the rest of the conversation , it is strongly hinted that may testify against . At 's office , one of 's spies reports that he 'd seen talking to the agent . tries to defend , saying that has 's emotional state mixed up . is unfazed however and orders to talk to his brother . If wo n't " dummy up " then will take him to one of 's hit men , is shocked and tries to reason with , who refuses to listen . Deeply troubled , leaves 's office to find . picks up in a taxicab and they two have a lengthy conversation where asks about his subpoena and if he plans to rat out in court . still seems undecided and reminds him about all the favors he and have done for him over the years and even offers a cushy job at another pier will be opening soon . When seems more likely to testify , tells to make up his mind before they arrive at 's place . is stunned that his own brother would suggest that he 'll be turned over to a hit man , pulls out a pistol and tells to take the job he was offered . suddenly comes to his senses and breaks down . He recounts how was once a potentially great athlete and says that 's manager was responsible for ruining whatever career he might have had as a boxer . counters , saying that was responsible for his downfall , betting on all those years ago and destroying whatever shot might have had at a prestigious boxing title and a promising career in the sport . realizes how badly he 's treated his brother over the years and gives the gun , telling him " you 're gon na need it . " He orders the driver to pull over and let out . The driver , one of 's spies , suddenly pulls into 's place nearby , where is waiting . goes to and 's apartment . refuses to open the door for him and breaks in , telling her she loves him . She tells him to leave and he grabs her and kisses her , showing little resistance . A voice calls to from the alley below , telling him his brother is there and wants to see him . rushes down to the alley and begins to walk toward the voice . follows , stopping momentarily to talk to one of her neighbors , who mentions that her own son was killed when he went looking for a man who was calling him into the alley . While runs to , a truck starts up and rushes toward them both ; breaks the window of a nearby door and they jump out of the way . looks at the truck as it speeds off and sees his brother hanging by a longshoreman 's hook piercing his coat . There are several bullet holes in his chest . , his arm bleeding from the broken glass , hauls his brother down , and distraughtly tells to get and stay with until he arrives . goes immediately to 's bar and holds everyone hostage at gunpoint . shows up and orders him to stay as well . shows up ; remains defensive with the pistol while tells him to give it up . tells to " go to " and hits him in the face and 's hostages escape . begins shouting about how the situation is n't 's concern and tells him that shooting would be useless since the law would favor . tells that the best thing he can do to avenge his brother 's murder is to testify in court and strip of his power . He also tells to get rid of the gun unless he 's too cowardly . He gives a beer ; takes a sip and throws the pistol at a picture of with an important - looking city official , shattering it . At the waterfront crime hearings , testifies about 's murder . He 's grilled at length about not only being the last person to see alive but also about how had angrily said that it was necessary to have killed to protect his interests in the union . In another office , a man watches the hearings on TV and hears 's testimony . He orders the TV shut off and tells his assistant that he wo n't accept any calls from . finishes on the stand and , as he walks past , who 's been called to the stand . Johnny mutters threats and becomes furious and attacks , finally calming down . goes home , followed by two cops . He tells them to stop following him and they scoff . He passes a friend on the stairs , who refuses to talk to him . In his apartment , is waiting . talks about losing his friends because he testified and asks if they are " real " friends to him anyway . goes up to the roof and finds that has killed all of his pigeons . suggests that they leave the waterfront and go to a farm out west where they 'll be left alone . notices a ship coming in to 's pier and , grabbing his hook and donning 's jacket , goes to the pier . At the pier , receives a cold welcome from his former friends . He stands there while calls the workers in . passes over for a job and when suggests they need more men , hires the first homeless man standing in the area . becomes enraged and marches down to the gangplank leading to 's office . He throws his hook at the door and emerges . Knowing that attacking in public would get him into deeper trouble , he tells to get lost . begins to berate openly , telling him he 's proud that he testified against , especially for killing anyone who crossed him . Johnny goads into charging him and the two begin to fight . When it becomes obvious that will lose , he calls his goons in to help and they viciously beat . and arrive on the scene just as orders his thugs to stop . The owner of the ship that arrived demands to know when the men will begin unloading the cargo and begins to muscle his way through the crowd , ordering the onlookers to begin working . When he reaches , he grabs him . Pop pushes off the gangplank and into the water ; the crowd cheers . A few of the men find and see how badly he 's been beaten . encourages to get up and walk to the pier to go to work ( he also tells that is taking bets that he wo n't make it ) ; if he does , the other men will follow him and oust as their leader . walks up to the pier , stumbling and falling , following behind to make sure nobody helps him while he walks . He reaches the pier entrance and the ship 's owner calls the rest of the men to work while continues to yell empty threats . They enter and the door rolls shut behind > 

 < synopsis > ( ) is a wealthy merchant living in at the time of . Under the influence of the oppressive , the land seethes with talk of revolt , and has sent more soldiers to quell the potential uprising . The new ( ) once lived in as a boy , and longs to rekindle his old friendship with , but when they meet it is obvious that has been changed by the years he has been away , fighting the enemies of the . He is harsh and calculating , driven by ambition , and eager to prove himself to . Asking for help in rounding up the local dissenters , they argue , and when refuses to betray his own people declares that they must be either friends or enemies , and leaves in anger . A few days later the parade through the city in a show of force and to announce the arrival of the new governor of . As they pass the house of , 's sister , ( ) , leans out over the balcony for a better look . She dislodges a few roof tiles which fall near the new governor as he rides by , panicking his horse and throwing him off . seizes an opportunity to frame the family for an attempted assassination . Arresting , his sister and mother , he throws them all into prison . learns that he is to be condemned without trial or hearing , and flies into a desperate rage . Breaking free from his jailers , smashes his way into 's chamber , demanding to know why he has done this evil deed . calmly explains that by condemning an old friend without hesitation , he will show the rest of that he is to be feared . " I asked for your help , " says , " and now you 've given it to me . " He dismisses to the death of a slave in the galleys , and leaves the mother and sister to rot in prison . Chained to a group of criminals , is marched through the desert . Barely alive , they pass though a village called , where a compassionate young man gives him water . Gazing into his eyes , is filled with wonder , and receives the life - giving gift of a simple drink . When an angry Roman guard barks the young man rises and the guard stares into his face , perceiving something there that , perhaps for the first time in his life , forces the to back down . is marched away with the other condemned men , but continues to gaze back at the man who saved his life . Three years pass . rows his life away in the galleys , his latest confinement is aboard a war armada . When the new admiral , ( ) comes aboard , he puts all the slaves to a test of endurance , looking for any with enough spirit to defy him . In the galley , he looks over his rowers , telling the guards to change one of them , seeing another who bears the scars of many whippings for insolence and finally . He suddenly lashes , seeing the anger and hate in his eyes but also the control not to attack the man . Later that night , during 's resting period , he is ordered to ' quarters , finding him asleep . suddenly awakes , noting that could have easily killed him . The two talk for a bit , mentioning that he owns some of the finest gladiator schools in the empire . refuses and returns to the ship 's hold . Soon the fleet engages the in battle and in the mayhem , ' ship is rammed . Shortly before the battle had begun , had ordered that be unshackled . himself is cast overboard only to be saved by . The two spend a few days floating at sea on a piece of flotsam , prevented from killing himself and bound by . Finding his fleet victorious , he returns in triumph to with at his side and after a time adopts him as a son . A rich and influential man once again , 's thoughts return to and the vengeance he has sworn on . Along the road to , meets a Arab sheikh and an old wise man named , one of those who followed the star of at the time of 's birth . now seeks grown into a man , and befriends , sensing the goodness of his soul , but also the hatred for an old enemy . Finding that is skilled in chariot racing , coaches to ride his team of white horses in the upcoming race against and his notorious blacks . accepts and prepares to meet in the arena . The sheikh meets with the lords of , included , and gets them to agree to four to one odds . When he learns of 's return , is astonished , but quickly begins to plot again . In the arena , many fortunes can change . meets with , demanding to know where his mother and sister are . claims not to know and harshly tells him to find them and arrange for their release . When arrives at the circus for the race , he spots , who has equipped the wheels of his chariot with spinning , gouging blades . Entering the arena in a grandiose procession , the contestants line up and await the signal from the governor , . He drops a white cloth , and the race is on . In this spectacular contest many other teams crash , and and collide time and again , striving for the lead . 's spinning blades prove useful against several of his opponents , ripping their chariots and wheels to splinters . When , consumed by his desire to defeat , crashes his chariot into another , yanking off one of his wheels , he is thrown out and dragged behind the stampeding horses of the racer behind him , then thrown out to the rear , landing in a heap in the sand . rides to a glorious victory , and the shattered body of is carried away . is bound to a table by Roman surgeons , who tell him they have to amputate his legs . He refuses to let them start until comes , wanting to face his old friend whole . As his life ebbs , confronts one last time , and tells him that his mother and sister are not dead as was thought , but alive , condemned to lowest cell block of the Roman prison . As they both have endured solitary confinement since their arrest , they both have contracted leprosy . They were freed and sent to a nearby leper colony to live out their final days . Cackling at his final victory over , gasps his last . " The game goes on ! " he hisses as he dies . A stunned goes forth , his victory hollow , the vengeance he 'd sought meaningless . Seeking release from his hatred , walks through the city , encountering again , who has now found the living he was seeking . Begging him to come and hear the words of , he tries to help and ease his pain , but to no avail . can not live with the thought of his beloved mother and sister suffering in the valley of the lepers , and seeks them out . Tenderly carrying them into the city , he finds it empty , as everyone has gone to the trial of . Hiding in the shadows , they all witness the suffering of as he is led to his crucifixion . As passes , recognises him as the young man who 'd saved his life with a simple drink of water in the desert . Amazed , he pushes through the guards , and as falls , carries a gourd of water to him and helps him to drink . Gazing in wonder once more into his eyes , is touched by . At the site of the , and weep at the cruelty , and watch as the sky turns dark . 's mother and sister take shelter in a nearby cave , and cry out in terror as the trembles , and lightning slashes the sky . A flash of light reveals their leprosy had been healed , a miracle they do not understand , but for which they thank . returns to his home , finding his family healed and restored to him , and finding also that the sacrifice of has taken the hatred out of his heart and saved his soul.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) is a wealthy merchant living in at the time of . Under the influence of the oppressive , the land seethes with talk of revolt , and has sent more soldiers to quell the potential uprising . The new ( ) once lived in as a boy , and longs to rekindle his old friendship with , but when they meet it is obvious that has been changed by the years he has been away , fighting the enemies of the . He is harsh and calculating , driven by ambition , and eager to prove himself to . Asking for help in rounding up the local dissenters , they argue , and when refuses to betray his own people declares that they must be either friends or enemies , and leaves in anger . A few days later the parade through the city in a show of force and to announce the arrival of the new governor of . As they pass the house of , 's sister , ( ) , leans out over the balcony for a better look . She dislodges a few roof tiles which fall near the new governor as he rides by , panicking his horse and throwing him off . seizes an opportunity to frame the family for an attempted assassination . Arresting , his sister and mother , he throws them all into prison . learns that he is to be condemned without trial or hearing , and flies into a desperate rage . Breaking free from his jailers , smashes his way into 's chamber , demanding to know why he has done this evil deed . calmly explains that by condemning an old friend without hesitation , he will show the rest of that he is to be feared . " I asked for your help , " says , " and now you 've given it to me . " He dismisses to the death of a slave in the galleys , and leaves the mother and sister to rot in prison . Chained to a group of criminals , is marched through the desert . Barely alive , they pass though a village called , where a compassionate young man gives him water . Gazing into his eyes , is filled with wonder , and receives the life - giving gift of a simple drink . When an angry Roman guard barks the young man rises and the guard stares into his face , perceiving something there that , perhaps for the first time in his life , forces the to back down . is marched away with the other condemned men , but continues to gaze back at the man who saved his life . Three years pass . rows his life away in the galleys , his latest confinement is aboard a war armada . When the new admiral , ( ) comes aboard , he puts all the slaves to a test of endurance , looking for any with enough spirit to defy him . In the galley , he looks over his rowers , telling the guards to change one of them , seeing another who bears the scars of many whippings for insolence and finally . He suddenly lashes , seeing the anger and hate in his eyes but also the control not to attack the man . Later that night , during 's resting period , he is ordered to ' quarters , finding him asleep . suddenly awakes , noting that could have easily killed him . The two talk for a bit , mentioning that he owns some of the finest gladiator schools in the empire . refuses and returns to the ship 's hold . Soon the fleet engages the in battle and in the mayhem , ' ship is rammed . Shortly before the battle had begun , had ordered that be unshackled . himself is cast overboard only to be saved by . The two spend a few days floating at sea on a piece of flotsam , prevented from killing himself and bound by . Finding his fleet victorious , he returns in triumph to with at his side and after a time adopts him as a son . A rich and influential man once again , 's thoughts return to and the vengeance he has sworn on . Along the road to , meets a Arab sheikh and an old wise man named , one of those who followed the star of at the time of 's birth . now seeks grown into a man , and befriends , sensing the goodness of his soul , but also the hatred for an old enemy . Finding that is skilled in chariot racing , coaches to ride his team of white horses in the upcoming race against and his notorious blacks . accepts and prepares to meet in the arena . The sheikh meets with the lords of , included , and gets them to agree to four to one odds . When he learns of 's return , is astonished , but quickly begins to plot again . In the arena , many fortunes can change . meets with , demanding to know where his mother and sister are . claims not to know and harshly tells him to find them and arrange for their release . When arrives at the circus for the race , he spots , who has equipped the wheels of his chariot with spinning , gouging blades . Entering the arena in a grandiose procession , the contestants line up and await the signal from the governor , . He drops a white cloth , and the race is on . In this spectacular contest many other teams crash , and and collide time and again , striving for the lead . 's spinning blades prove useful against several of his opponents , ripping their chariots and wheels to splinters . When , consumed by his desire to defeat , crashes his chariot into another , yanking off one of his wheels , he is thrown out and dragged behind the stampeding horses of the racer behind him , then thrown out to the rear , landing in a heap in the sand . rides to a glorious victory , and the shattered body of is carried away . is bound to a table by Roman surgeons , who tell him they have to amputate his legs . He refuses to let them start until comes , wanting to face his old friend whole . As his life ebbs , confronts one last time , and tells him that his mother and sister are not dead as was thought , but alive , condemned to lowest cell block of the Roman prison . As they both have endured solitary confinement since their arrest , they both have contracted leprosy . They were freed and sent to a nearby leper colony to live out their final days . Cackling at his final victory over , gasps his last . " The game goes on ! " he hisses as he dies . A stunned goes forth , his victory hollow , the vengeance he 'd sought meaningless . Seeking release from his hatred , walks through the city , encountering again , who has now found the living he was seeking . Begging him to come and hear the words of , he tries to help and ease his pain , but to no avail . can not live with the thought of his beloved mother and sister suffering in the valley of the lepers , and seeks them out . Tenderly carrying them into the city , he finds it empty , as everyone has gone to the trial of . Hiding in the shadows , they all witness the suffering of as he is led to his crucifixion . As passes , recognises him as the young man who 'd saved his life with a simple drink of water in the desert . Amazed , he pushes through the guards , and as falls , carries a gourd of water to him and helps him to drink . Gazing in wonder once more into his eyes , is touched by . At the site of the , and weep at the cruelty , and watch as the sky turns dark . 's mother and sister take shelter in a nearby cave , and cry out in terror as the trembles , and lightning slashes the sky . A flash of light reveals their leprosy had been healed , a miracle they do not understand , but for which they thank . returns to his home , finding his family healed and restored to him , and finding also that the sacrifice of has taken the hatred out of his heart and saved his soul.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) is stroking the hair of his wife ( ) , saying through a voiceover that he 'd like to crack her skull and pick apart her brain to answer that eternal question married couples have : What are you 5 , takes out the garbage early in the morning , and looks around at the quiet neighbourhood . He then goes to a bar he co - owns with his sister ( ) . He brings her a board game that she throws in with a pile of others . He asks for a drink , and she pours one for each of them . It 's the morning of and 's 5th wedding anniversary , and he expects another scavenger hunt . seems distressed , not wanting to be there at all . 8 , and first meet at a party in . He writes for a men 's magazine and she writes personality quizzes for another . She makes a comment on the cleft of his chin making him look untrustworthy . He puts two fingers over the cleft so he 'll appear more trusting . They take a walk and pass through a bakery that is getting a sugar delivery . Sugar is floating around everywhere as and walk through it . tells he has to kiss her now . He wipes some sugar off her lips and kisses her . They are later seen in bed with her lying on her back in her underwear and him performing oral sex on her . Present . gets a call from a neighbor , telling him that his cat is outside . He returns home and calls for . No answer . He goes into the living room and sees a table flipped over and the glass top is shattered on the floor . screams 's name , startling a neighbor . calls the police . Arriving at his home are and ( and ) . They inspect the place . sees a small splatter of blood in the kitchen above the range . In the living room , they see a wall with pictures of " " , a book series written by 's parents . comments that she loves the books and is surprised to learn that is married to herself . 24 , and go to a party held by her parents and ( and ) . It is to celebrate the latest book , where gets married . As and discuss the exhibitions at the party , it becomes clear that the parents ' fictional character is a dramatically " improved " version of their real daughter that is sold it to the public . ( For example , they gave a dog , but refused one for their real daughter . They made a prodigy cellist when real the dropped out . ) asks to go sit with some reporters so they can interview her . She does , and they ask her mundane questions such as why she 's not married yet ( to which she replies that has always been one step ahead of her ) . comes in pretending to be a reporter . He asks her more personal questions , leading up to a marriage proposal - opening his notebook to reveal an engagement ring . He mentions that she has a world class vagina . is brought into the police station for questioning about 's disappearance . and find it odd that he seems rather indifferent and passive when answering questions and the fact that he does n't know if has any close friends or her blood type . He goes to call 's parents . Her mother asks to speak to . In the next room , finds that his father ( - ) is in there after the police found him wandering around town , having left his assisted living facility ( he suffers from 's ) . drives him back to the facility . stays at 's house while the police inspect his home . A pregnant neighbor , ( ) , who claims to be 's best friend , comes by and asks about . In the upstairs bedroom , says that he found " it " in the drawer of " unmentionables . " pulls out an envelope , labelled " One 5 , 2009Nick and have been happily married for two years . On their anniversary , another of 's scavenger hunts takes them to the library to have sex in a quiet area . gives a gift . He opens the box to find a package of very high quality bed sheets . She refers to a private joke they had about how their sex was too good for ordinary sheets . He laughs and pulls out a gift for her - the same sheets . questioned about this " clue " , says always prepares a treasure hunt for their anniversary . The first clue leads him and to his office , with another envelope on his desk labelled " Two . " finds a pair of red panties in the office . is surprised by this discovery , as it does n't seem directly related to the clue . The second clue mentions a brown house , but tells the detective that he does n't understand it . goes to his father 's old home , which is painted blue . He arrives , but sets off the alarm . He enters the code twice to disarm the alarm , but it does n't work . The phone rings , and it is the alarm monitoring company investigating the alarm . As he starts to explain that it 's his father 's house , the detectives arrive , so he figures they must be following him . He finds the third clue there but only has time to tuck it into his back pocket , hiding it from the police . The detectives question him as to why he 's there . He says he comes by once a week to make sure the place does n't burn down . 's parents fly in from as a press conference is held to spread awareness of 's disappearance . asks others for help , but he appears emotionless . He is asked to pose next to a poster of , and a photographer captures the brief moment when a smile appears on his face . and 's parents meet with to determine some possible suspects . Rand names an ex - boyfriend of 's , , who apparently tried to commit suicide after broke up with him . They also mention a former classmate named who was convicted of sexually assaulting . People go to the volunteer center to help find . One person there is ( ) , but he leaves without saying anything . tries to come off as friendly to others , but does n't buy it . Even thinks he is acting like a " homecoming king . " is approached in a hallway by a woman who extends her sympathy and offers to make him a chicken - pie casserole . She stands next to him and takes a selfie of the two of them , telling him to say " chicken - pie . " He makes a fake smile as she takes the photo and he immediately realizes this was a mistake and asks her to delete the photo . She refuses , and he asks her not to share it with anyone . She replies , " I 'll share it with anyone I please " as she walks away . The photo goes viral . Consequently , the media starts analyzing . TV personalities like ( ) paint him as an unempathetic 's diary explains how both she and lose their jobs . talks about the troubles they are having , then says , " But that 's all background noise . " She says that none of it matters as long as they have each other . Then tells that her parents are having financial problems and asked her for her trust fund money , which is nearly a million dollars . is shocked that she would do that without talking to him first . explains that the money is really their money anyway , and then says , " This is the part where you say , ' It 's all background noise . ' " He appears to calm down , and repeats the phrase . Later on , has started losing interest in the marriage and has begun overspending on electronics like video games and a new laptop . thinks he is trying to make her look like a cold , bitchy wife . To make matters worse , and 's mother ( ) has been diagnosed with breast cancer , forcing and to move back to his hometown in . feels a bit upset because did n't even discuss the decision to move to with her , although she does support it . In general , feels left out . She says he is just using her for sex . is getting ready to go out with his old friends one evening when tries to persuade him to stay with her , but he refuses . Then she offers to join him , but he also refuses , saying how she wo n't enjoy it . Then Any makes the suggestion that they have a child . He starts to get angry , asking why could n't they have had this argument four hours prior , instead of when he is about to leave . The argument escalates as they go down the stairs , and at the bottom of the stairs grabs and throws her down , and she strikes the bannister post and falls to the floor . He immediately looks shameful . Present few nights after disappears , is at 's house . It 's late and has gone to bed . gets a text saying , " I 'm outside . " opens the back door . A young woman , ( ) , comes in and starts kissing . He tells her to be quiet while is sleeping . He makes sure that has n't said anything to anybody about her affair with or that he has mentioned wanting to divorce . He asks her if she left some red panties in his office , and she is doubtful , but not 100 % sure . They continue kissing and have sex . has slip out the door early in the morning , thinking is still asleep . However , appears in the kitchen and angrily berates her brother for lying to her , knowing what would happen if the cops or media were to find out about this . At night , there is a vigil for . stands alongside her parents , and tries to seem more empathetic and anxious to find , telling the crowd how he truly loves his wife . is clearly visible up front in the crowd and mouths the word " asshole " in a way that only he can see . walks by and calls out to , asking him if he knew that was six weeks pregnant . The reporters chase all the way to the police car as they escort him away . presses about the pregnancy bombshell . He says he did not know she was pregnant , but that he did want kids and did n't . He shows her a letter from a fertility clinic that they were going to , stating that they were going to dispose of a semen sample they had left there , unless someone came to retrieve it . and meet back in his home and explain that the results of a light test showed that someone wiped up a large pool of blood in the kitchen . also doubts that knew , until shows him photographs of the two of them together , along with 's kids . She even hands a document of recent expensive transactions from his credit card , mentioning items including golf clubs and a guitar , though says he never bought any of those items . Additionally , presses about the fact that he upped 's life insurance policy earlier that year to over a million dollars . He barks back , " because she told me to ! " gets a call confirming 's urine sample analysis indicate that she was indeed pregnant . remembers the third clue in his pocket , and tries to decipher it . and continue their investigation , checking out the abandoned mall , now frequented by prostitutes and drug dealers . They find a local dealer and show him a picture of . He tells that she came by and tried to buy a gun from him . He had a clear memory of the event ; it was 's and she had been wearing a pink dress . They go back to 's father 's home , wondering why went there in the first place so soon after 's disappearance . In the furnace in the basement , they find 's diary hidden in the furnace , burnt slightly . , meanwhile , figures out that the third clue refers to a wood shed outside 's home . He discovers a large pile of items from the credit card purchases stored there , as well as a gift - wrapped box in the middle of it all . 's Version : 5 , 2012We go back to " the morning of " , and we learn the truth : is alive , and she staged everything to lead up to her disappearance . She is seen driving away from with her arm bandaged up with a blood spot evident on the inside of her elbow . had used a variety of pens to make recent diary entries appear as if they were written over the past five years , and periodically threw each one out the car window . It documents a happy marriage deteriorating to the point where she buys a gun because she is afraid that may kill her . She even faked her pregnancy by befriending pregnant and making her think that was hurting her . drained her toilet and offered lemonade until she had to use the bathroom . then stole her urine and used it to submit it for the pregnancy test . On their fifth anniversary , told to take a walk and really think about their marriage , knowing full well he would go for a walk in his favorite isolated spot along the beach and thus have no alibi . Meanwhile she set up a crime scene to make look guilty . Her plans included suicide so that her body would be found to completely frame . To make sure she 's not found out , she cuts her hair , dyes it , and makes herself look unkempt and disheveled . She begins eating large amounts of junk food to gain weight . She hides out at a small resort under the name , even hitting herself in the face with a hammer to sell the idea that she is hiding from an abusive boyfriend . She befriends a woman named ( ) . tells her how she came across leaving the bar with during a snowy night , wiping her lips before he kissed her the same way he kissed when they first met ( this part is true ) . With her plan working perfectly , she postpones her suicide for another month . Back to : brings the gift box inside and opens it to find and dolls , with the doll holding a baby and missing a mallet . Together , he and deduce that has framed for her disappearance . goes to to find ( ) , a lawyer specializing in tough , high - profile cases who has been following 's story in the media . He agrees to help in his defense . He gives the contact information of ( 's second boyfriend , who was charged with sexual assault ) so that can ask him questions . meets ( ) in a bar . says he and dated for a while , but he could see that she was using him . He gave her some space , hoping she 'd break off the relationship . One day , she seduced him , and told him she wanted rough sex . She staged a scene where she had marked her wrists and left neckties tied to the bed to make it appear he had tied her up . She went to the police , and claimed he had raped her . He pleaded guilty to a reduced charge to avoid prison time . Now he is a registered sex offender and has not been able to get a job . He warns about how evil and manipulative she is . later visits after finding his address from a letter he wrote to . After asks about his side of the story regarding his attempted suicide , closes the door on him and walks back inside his house without confirming or denying the things she told about him . At the resort , plays mini - golf with and her friend ( ) . At one point , she jumps up and drops her fanny pack full of money . and notice . The next day , as is cleaning the room meticulous to prepare to leave , they force their way into her room and start searching for the money . threatens to call the police . says that she does n't know what she 's up to , but has dyed hair and she does n't think she 's ever been hit . says , " You wo n't call the police . " They find the money under her dress , and take it . Now penniless and desperate , calls the tip line , and reports suspicious activity at 's wood shed . She then places a call from a pay phone . Meanwhile , goes to to help and clear up 's image . tells what he thinks has been going on with , dropping clues that only he would really know . For instance , the reason he knew that the " brown house " in the treasure hunt clue was his dad 's house was because they used to pretend that his dad was a spy called . also admits to the affair , which says he ought to tell the cops about so that it gives them one less reason to think had a motivation to kill . later books an interview on TV with ( ) to tell his side of the story . Tanner coaches him to make him seem more likeable by having admit that he 's been unfaithful and dishonest , which would earn him some possible points in the media . On the day of the interview , keeps trying to get to come off less smug and more genuinely upset by pelting him with gummy bears in his dressing room when appears too smug or untrustworthy . At the same time , meets at a casino . She never mentions getting her money stolen , but she continues to play up the abused wife angle . They leave for 's lake house . As meets , a bombshell hits the news : has confessed to her affair with at a press conference , with 's parents . and see the news while gets wind of it at the same time . tells reporters that her and 's love for has ended then and there . and watch 's interview with , while is watching with . convincingly comes off as remorseful for the affair , but he insists that he did not kill his wife . lets him speak directly into the camera to say something to . He says he loves her and mentions the woodshed ( figuratively , apparently as a secret message to ) before putting two fingers on his chin , knowing would recognize that . checks the Internet and sees that is trending positive with the public . Things take an unfortunate turn when and other officers show up at 's home with a search warrant due to the call about the woodshed . They find all the merchandise from the credit card bill . Both and are taken into custody . reads to the pages of 's diary , which ends with " This man may truly kill me . " brings in the missing mallet from the puppets . It has been burned in their fireplace , but traces of 's blood are found on it . now has a murder weapon , and arrests . He protests , but shuts him up . At 's home , learns that has security cameras installed all over the property . She is virtually a prisoner in his home . While he 's out at work , she clearly stages what looks like a brutal rape . She soaks her nightgown in red wine , binds her hands and feet , then crawls to the camera , crying , making it look like she 's just been raped . and are released on bond . The media continues to hound them on the way out , now that everyone is convinced is a cold monster . quietly whispers to himself , " Come home , . I dare you . "Amy waits for to come home . She gets a wine bottle and puts it in herself to create injuries . When gets home , seduces him and agrees to run off with him to once the trial is over . They go into the bedroom . She starts taking his clothes off , tearing his shirt open , and they start having sex . demands it to be harder . is caught off guard , once he gives over to the moment , lifting his head to the ceiling , grabs a box cutter she concealed beneath the pillows and slashes his throat . She is drenched in his blood as he dies underneath her . She does look upset about what she 's just done . Nearly a month after 's disappearance , looks out his window and sees drive up , still covered in blood . The reporters and neighbors are shocked and begin clamoring around and as she walks up to him . He whispers to her , " You fucking bitch " , before she collapses in his arms . At the hospital , is interviewed by a roomful of police and weaves a fabricated story about how kidnapped and raped her before she made her heroic escape . asks her questions about the items in 's woodshed , but deflects the question and returns to her rape story , while also being heavily medicated on painkillers . The reporters follow her and home , happy that she 's alive and that is now vindicated . However , knows something is wrong , and asks her what really happened . forces to disrobe to prove he 's not wearing a wire . She goes to the shower to wash off the copious amounts of 's blood still covering her . In the shower with , she all but confesses that she framed and murdered him in order to return to as he had requested ( and presumably also to make her return seem heroic ) . sleeps in a separate room and locks the door behind him . meets with , , and ( who now trusts ) about this revelation , though without sufficient evidence and with everyone on 's side , they can not prove that she murdered . Seven weeks later . and make their first public appearance together at the volunteer center , posing as a happily reunited couple . They are even set to have an interview with in their home . As they are getting ready , gives a gift , which is a pregnancy test . It 's positive . first says it ca n't be his , and he 'll demand a blood test . Then he realizes that she has retrieved his semen sample , and is using this as a ploy to keep him with her by impregnating herself . The tension escalates and he grabs her and slams her head against the wall , calling her a cunt . She tells him she 's the same cunt he fell in love with . And she 's the only cunt that ever made him feel like a man . Reluctantly , joins hand - in - hand for the interview . During the interview , prods and he says they 're going to be parents , when appears overjoyed and hugs . later finds out about the pregnancy and cries for her brother , and is distraught that he plans to stay with her for the sake of the child ... at least for the next 18 years . The film concludes with a similar shot as the opening , stroking 's hair again , wondering to himself just what she 's thinking.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The movie opens when 78 - year - old , played by , is in bed at home . He dreams about being on a city street with no other people present . A clock hanging above the street has no hands . checks his pocket watch ; it too has no hands . A figure appears with its back turned . walks up to the figure and touches it . It has no face . The figure collapses onto the pavement . Blood streams out of the figure . Next a hearse drawn by a team of horses turns a corner and enters the street on which the dream - is standing . It approaches and then passes him but its rear wheel gets caught on a lamppost . Although no one is driving the hearse , the horses continue forward . The left rear wheel breaks off at the lamppost . The horses and hearse drive away but the coffin comes loose , and slides out and onto the street . A hand appears on the outside of the coffin . looks at the hand . His hand and the hand outstretched from the coffin touch , with the hand coming out of the coffin holding . The body in the coffin is also . He awakes . The viewer senses the loneliness in . And that 's time is running out . These are themes that come up again and again through the day . He leaves his bedroom to waken his maid , played by . asks her to pack his suitcase and prepare breakfast for him . He has decided to drive to , where he will later today receive an honorary doctorate as an award for his contributions to medicine . They squabble because they had previously planned to fly from to Lund . While eating breakfast , , 's daughter - in - law , enters the breakfast room . She is played by . has been staying at 's house , and asks if she can accompany on the 300 - mile drive from to Lund . He agrees . They depart . tries to smoke but objects . There is some tension in the car almost from the beginning of the trip . They manage to converse . mentions that his son , , owes his father money , and on principle is going to pay it back , a principle both father and son endorse . talks about her relationship with , who , like his father , is a physician . A good deal is revealed , especially in a flashback that summarizes the conversation in the car . Her marriage to ( ) is tense and unhappy . is as rigid as but dislikes his father . and quarreled sharply when she revealed to him that she was pregnant . He objected , and said he did not want children . 's marriage was also an unhappy one . At this particular juncture , the viewer develops a sense of the film 's power of truth - telling . decides to make a detour , and drives to the house where , during his youth , he spent many summers . One could find in the summer house his mother and father and 10 brothers and sisters as well as visiting cousins , uncles , and aunts . goes off to swim in the lake , leaving alone . He walks up to a patch of wild strawberries ( the Swedish title of the film better translates to " wild strawberry patch " ) . begins remembering his youthful days at the house and the land nearby . Flashbacks with still in the scene show some of what life was like there long ago . His cousin is picking wild strawberries to give to her deaf uncle as a birthday present when ( Per ) , 's brother , arrives . helps her pick strawberries and flirts with her . They kiss . She is at first willing but then breaks away . She is too committed to the young to continue the dalliance . at that moment is away with his father fishing in the lake . At the lunch table , 's twin sisters , who are loud and naive , report on the interlude between and , embarrassing . One of the twins is played by director 's daughter . The older looks in on the scene . Sara , upset , leaves the table , and is consoled by her aunt , with looking on . describes how she thinks is too good for her . He is too upright . is more playful . The viewer learns that was in love with but ultimately she married his brother . is the last of the 10 children alive . , 's widow , is still alive and in her 70s . Near the house , a teenage girl and two boys come into the scene . One is her boyfriend and the other is a kind of chaperone . They are hitchhiking . Their ultimate destination is . The girl , whose name is also , is played by ( and have long been part of 's company of players ) . also plays the who was 's long - ago love . Of course , the present - reminds of his long - ago , and lost , . The boys , ( ) and ( ) , argue about the existence of and other matters , and tries to keep their arguments civil . Although one boy is closer to than the other , the viewer gets the sense that both are interested in her , much the way and were interested in the of long ago but only one will succeed with her . Back on the road , a beetle comes hurtling around a bend , and nearly crashes into 's big old . 's black car is reminiscent of a hearse . The turns over but the passengers are unhurt , physically that is . The man ( ) and woman ( ) in the car are a married couple almost out of . The accident , the husband admits , was the result of driving while quarreling . agrees to put the two in the car , and drive on toward . The husband and wife are settled into seats but continue to bicker . The husband needles the wife incessantly . She smacks him several times . , who is driving , stops the car , and orders the two to exit the car for the sake of the young people riding in the back . The car , now reduced to five travelers , stops at a service station that is run by a husband ( ) and wife ( - ) . Here we learn about another side of . The couple is very happy to see . Apparently long ago he worked some wonderful medicine to help the family . They admire him greatly , and absolutely refuse to let him pay for the gas or any of the work they did on the car . She is pregnant , and plans to name her child , if it is a son , , after the doctor . asks them to notify him when the child is born . He would like to be the child 's godfather . They soon stop at a restaurant . The group has a delightful lunch at an outdoor terrace overlooking the beautiful . enjoys the company of the young people . The young people learn about 's award . There is another stop on the journey . At 's request , drives to the house of his ancient mother . Her house is en route . accompanies into the house , and the young people remain in the car . 's mother is in her mid-90s and complains that she is always cold and that none of her grandchildren visit her . shows them some old artifacts from an earlier era , old toys and a pocket watch with no hands , the same pocket watch that appeared in 's dream at the beginning of the film . Later in the car , tells how she is impressed by the mother 's coldness . senses how that coldness runs through the family down to . falls asleep in the car while drives . He dreams that he is being given an examination by a professor of medicine . The professor is none other than the man asked to leave the car earlier that day . The cadaver he is to check is the man 's wife but she is n't dead . fails the examination . Perhaps it was not a medical school examination at all but an examination of how a lonely and aloof man lived his life . He awakes . The car has stopped . The young people have gone into a forest glen to gather flowers to make a bouquet for . He is flattered by their attention . They reach . is in his home to greet them . is there too although she was so angry in the morning that there was a chance she would not come . The three young people come . , , and dress for the ceremony which is an hour away . The young people plant themselves along the route of the processional to cheer . The ceremony expresses great dignity and achievement , with many words uttered in . Afterwards is in and 's house although the viewer has the feeling that it is not going to be 's house much longer . tries to induce to call him by his first name ; after all they have known each other for 40 years . She declines . is in bed in a second - floor bedroom . The young people serenade from the garden below . He wishes them well as they got a lift to and are closer yet to their goal of reaching . comes in . wants to forget about the debt . also wants and to reconcile . enters the room , and she and have an affectionate exchange . The she heads off to party with . The viewer gets a sense that has to some extent broken through his loneliness and reconciled with the important people in his > 

 < synopsis > The & " speeds into , in the of 1861 , " pulled by the locomotive " . " The engineer , ( ) gets down to oil around , and is observed by two admiring boys . He has two loves : his engine and his girl . The two boys follow him when he goes to call on ( ) . They follow him right into her house , and he has to trick them to get them to leave . He presents with a portrait of himself in front of his engine . 's brother ( ) arrives with the news that war has broken out . He and their father ( ) go to enlist . expects to enlist , so he says goodbye . She gives him a kiss , and he backs off the edge of the porch . runs by a shortcut and vaults a counter to be first in line . He does n't hear that he is " more valuable to the as an engineer , " so he does n't understand why he is rejected . He tries two more times to sign up , but is kicked out the door . 's father and brother invite him into the line , but he has had enough . They think he is a disgrace , and tell he never got in line . He sits dejected on his engine 's siderod . tells him she wo n't speak to him until he is in uniform . An engine hostler moves the engine , with still sitting on the siderod . He does n't notice until , on the third revolution , the locomotive is entering the engine - house . One year later , in Chattanooga , ( ) and his " chief spy " ( ) hatch a plan to take a group of spies to steal a train at and drive it north , burning bridges to cut the supply line to the army threatening Chattanooga . At , boards 's train to visit her wounded father . sees her pointedly fuss with her brother 's medals . When the train stops at for breakfast , and his men get off on the side away from the station . gets into one of the boxcars to retrieve money from her trunk . The men remove the coupling pin between the boxcars and the coaches , get aboard , and start the engine . They discover , and have to take her . calls for others to follow him , as he runs after his train , but they soon give up running . The spies tie up . They stop to cut the telegraph wires , and back at , the operator notices the line go dead . stops at a handcar shed , and only then notices that no one has followed him . But he gets the handcar going . The spies remove a rail and jam stones in the guardrail . falls off the handcar , which runs off the track and smashes down an embankment . The " General " speeds past , where the " " waits on a siding . sees a bicycle , which he leaps on , but it does n't work well along the rough roadbed . On the " , " unpacks a uniform . runs into and shouts for help . Soldiers pile onto the flatcar behind the " . " pulls the pin behind the flatcar to leave the rest of the train , but the flatcar is not coupled to the locomotive , and when he speeds away he does not notice the flatcar full of soldiers is left behind . By the time he notices he is alone , sees a railroad mortar on a siding . The have stopped for water and wood . is pulling the mortar car . The spies see him , and pull away without shutting off the water , and gets an unexpected shower . . wo n't stop and fight because he assumes they are outnumbered . They chop through the rear wall of the end boxcar . Back on the mortar car , loads one handful ( and a bit more ) of powder , wadding , and a cannonball into the mortar , aimed to arc over the engine and hit the spies . He lights the fuse , and hurries back over the tender to the engine . The mortar fires , and sends the cannonball in a short arc right into the cab . rolls it out of the cab and returns to the mortar . As he prepares another shot , there is a huge explosion beside the track back down the line . This time he puts the whole canister of powder in the gun . In hurrying back to the cab , his foot gets caught in the coupling bar , and dislodges it . When he finally gets his foot unstuck , the bar falls down and bangs against the crossties . The jostling makes the mortar lower until it points right at , who has now got his foot caught in a loop of chain . He gets free , and scrambles all the way to the cowcatcher . The two trains enter an S - curve , and are at just the right places when the mortar fires that the shot misses the " " and explodes just behind the spies . The release the rear boxcar to leave it in 's way . He pushes it onto a passing siding and proceeds . Busy feeding the fire , he does n't notice that the boxcar continues to roll to the end of the siding and back onto the main track . He ca n't figure out how the boxcar got in front of him again . From the remaining boxcar the drop timbers across the rails . , looking for a cloth to handle a leaky valve , does n't see when the boxcar hits one of the timbers and is derailed out of the way . He ca n't figure out why the boxcar is now gone . Now he can see the timbers on the track . He slows the engine , and runs ahead to lift the first one . But he stumbles , and falls back onto the moving cowcatcher , holding the timber . With timing , he uses it to hit the next one out of the way . The throw a switch to a spur track , and lift over the tender to the engine cab . , occupied with firewood again , sees just in time to stop before the end of the spur track . He backs out of the siding , and starts the engine forward , but the wheels slip . He gets down to throw dirt onto the rails . He does n't notice when the wheels get a grip and the engine pulls away . He has to run to jump on the back of the tender . The have started a fire in the remaining boxcar , and they leave it in a covered bridge . arrives in time to push it out . But there is so much smoke in the cab that he retreats to the tender deck , where he sits on the water hatch , not having noticed the lid is not on . He finally diverts the burning car onto a siding . is so busy chopping wood on the tender he does not notice the army retreating . The army now passes , and . removes his uniform . finally notices the soldiers , and crouches down on the floor of the cab . The " " passes under a trestle , and loops around to stop on the trestle above . When passes below , the drop timbers down on him . Some land on the tender , providing fuel . But gets a good look , and says , " There is only one man on that engine . " stops , and gets off to hide in the woods . It starts to rain . When night falls , climbs through the window of a house and takes food from the dining table . When a number of officers enter , he hides under it , and hears them planning to get supply trains across the bridge so the army can attack the the next day . One officer 's cigar burns a hole in the tablecloth , and is able to see when is brought in and locked in the next room . The officers leave . knocks out a sentry with a log and steals his uniform . He knocks out another sentry with his rifle butt , and climbs in the window of 's room . He gets her through the window , and leads her into the forest . They encounter a bear , and both get stuck in a bear trap . keeps losing , so he decides they should stay in one place until dawn . The next morning , sees his locomotive . He empties a large sack of boots and stuffs into the bag . Then he realizes one of his own shoes has come off and he has to find it among all those on the ground . He joins a line of soldiers loading the boxcar behind the " . " He stands where can reach to uncouple it from the rest of the train , then puts her into the boxcar as a bag of supplies . He cringes and covers his eyes when he sees a crate and a barrel tossed in after her . He joins the line loading firewood , knocks out the officer in the cab , and starts the engine , heading back south . stops outside of town , loops a rope over a telegraph pole , and ties it to the boxcar . When he pulls away , the pole and wire are pulled down , and the telegraph line is cut . He chops the rope , leaving the pole across the track . From the tender , he chops through the front wall of the boxcar , climbs in , and searches for . He finds her among all the freight only when he steps on the sack she is in . Then he has to help her get across to the tender . stops to throw fence rails onto the tender for firewood , but he has some difficulty getting them to stay there . Meanwhile , the have given chase with the and another engine . They have to stop to get the telegraph pole out of the way . takes what is left of the rope , and ties it across the track between two young pine trees . almost leaves without her . When she shows what she has done , he demonstrates how ridiculously flimsy it is . But the are coming , and they scramble into the engine cab and start off . The rope pinions the soldiers riding the " " and the two trees are uprooted and get caught up in the siderods . 's arrangement has succeeded in forcing the pursuers to stop once more . knocks out the whole back wall of the boxcar . The have to stop again to clear it off the track . He slows them down by tossing all the freight onto the track out the open back . In the cab , the officer is just regaining consciousness . returns just in time , knocks him out with a well - aimed log , and takes his pistol . They stop at a water tank . does not notice he has pulled the spout away from the supply pipe . When he opens the valve , is knocked down by the deluge . He replaces the spout , and she gets more water over her . They leave , the water still flowing , and it drenches the officers on both the chasing trains . feeds the fire . She sees a log with a big hole in it , and rejects it , tossing it out of the cab . ca n't believe it . The plan to couple to the rear of the boxcar . sweeps the cab ; tosses the broom . feeds the fire with kindling ; picks up a sliver and hands it to her . She tosses it in the firebox . He shakes her , then kisses her . The catch up , and couple to the rear of the boxcar . At the forward end , uncouples it . The fire at him . They switch the boxcar into a siding , then back out onto the main track . The second train smashes into them , knocking down officers . They just get re - seated when the train starts with a lurch , and they tumble again . fastens a chain between the tender and some switch points . He has start the engine , and the chain deforms the switch points . But ca nt stop the engine . runs downhill to meet her where the track passes below , but she gets the locomotive reversed , and he has to scramble back up the hill . They meet the at the broken switch , where the two trains end up on an elevated spur track , smashing again , allowing and to get away . sticks the end of a fence rail in the fire . He stops in the middle of the old unstable wooden bridge of , and piles firewood on the ties behind the tender . Meanwhile , the officers ca n't figure out how to fix the switch so they can continue the pursuit , and a army is approaching the rendezvous at the bridge . pours from the headlamp onto the firewood . knocks the burning fence rail off the tender , and is trapped on the far side of the fire in the middle of the bridge . He jumps over the fire just as moves the engine forward , and falls through a gap into the river but luckily they both manage to swim to safety . The officers are still ineptly dealing with the broken switch . hails a picket , and is fired at . points out that he is still wearing the uniform , so he changes . They pull into , with the blasting , and runs to the to warn them of the attack . The leads the army out of town , and and find themselves in the middle of a stampede of traffic . sees her wounded father , and is left in the deserted street . He finds a sword belt and pistol , straps them on , and follows the army . The officers are still trying to fix the switch . A locomotive engineer pushes his way through them and does a neat , quick fix using an ax . The two engines reach the bridge at the same time as the army arrives . The ( not realising how unstable and burned up the bridge is ) says , " That bridge is not burned enough to stop you , and my men will ford the river . " The " " proceeds onto the bridge to chase them , until suddenly it loses control from the old unstable bridge and plunges down from great height to the reveighn below , and the engine has a big train crash into the lake . The surprise the army , and a fight begins . is near an officer , and he imitates his commanding gestures , but his sword keeps coming apart . He stands near a gun battery , where a sharpshooter keeps picking off the artillerymen . Finally 's broken sword is effective . At his commanding swing , the blade comes off again and spears the sharpshooter . tries firing the unmanned cannon . He has to yank the firing lanyard so hard that the gun tilts straight up before firing . He retreats , but the shot lands in the river , blowing a dam . The surge of water catches the infantry in the river , forcing them to retreat . directs the other artillerymen to fire at officers on the remaining train . They retreat , and the whole army retreats . directs another shot that derails the last car , stopping the retreating supply train . saves a battle flag , and mounts a rock , inadvertently stepping on an officer who was observing from a cleft . The victorious army marches back into town , with among those leading . He peels off and sits on the rear of his locomotive . When he goes into the cab , he finds the forgotten officer just waking up . He escorts him to and hands him over to the . After a brief explanation , the has remove the uniform that does not belong to him , as and her father watch . The then gives him an officers coat and the surrendered sword . He poses for and is enlisted as a . takes to the , and they sit together on the siderod . His kiss is interrupted by the need to salute a passing soldier . . . then another . . . and another . Then a whole regiment approaches , so repositions so he can kiss while he pumps his hand up and down in salute after > 

 < synopsis > of , , flash across the screen as an 's voice ( ) describes the racketeer trade in the post - World era . He describes that many amateurs have tried to get involved in this career , but he implies that they always end up dead . Meanwhile , the city is quartered into sectors policed by occupying forces -- the , the , the and the -- though they barely can handle the criminal element and do n't even speak the same language . The city is devastated ( " bombed about a bit , " says the narrator ) , covered in jagged rubble . He begins to tell the story of an coming to named , who has come to accept a job from an old friend . ( ) gets off his train and is surprised that his friend , , is n't at the station to meet him . goes to 's flat , but the building porter ( ) , through extremely broken , tells him that he just missed 's friends leaving with a coffin . The porter says that was killed , hit by a truck right in front of the building . Martins goes to a massive graveyard and finds a funeral service . An ( ) hovering nearby informs it is 's funeral . Standing by the grave are two middle - aged men , both of whom eye suspiciously . Also in attendance is a pretty woman ( ) who does n't notice him . After the funeral , Martins begins to walk back into town , and the offers him a ride . The stranger introduces himself as , a police officer in the British sector of , and offers to buy him a drink . agrees and proceeds to drink while reminiscing about . It is revealed that is an author of pulp Western novellas . As he talks about his old friend , says that it 's better that is dead , since he was a murderer and a racketeer . takes umbrage at 's suggestion and reaches to punch him , but he 's quickly socked in the face by fellow English soldier ( ) . Paine apologizes and escorts the tipsy Martins to the nearby hotel , explaining to earnestly that he is a huge fan of his books . sets Martins up at the hotel for the night , telling him he can catch a plane out of the next day . promises he will prove him wrong about . Happening by on the way out of the hotel is another named ( - ) . tells that is an author , and though has never heard of him , he is excited to have a writer in . introduces himself to and explains he represents the British cultural propaganda department in . He invites to stay and give lecture in a few days at the department 's meeting . Figuring he could use the extra time in town as an opportunity to look into 's death , accepts the offer . is then called on the hotel phone by a man who identifies himself as . The man says he is a friend of 's . Martins and set up a meeting at a nearby cafe . When they meet , recognizes ( ) as one of the two men at 's funeral . is carrying one of 's books , which he says had given to him , and a small dog . proceeds to grill about the circumstances of 's death . and Martins go out to the street in front of 's apartment building to reconstruct the events of the accident . 's version is this : he was walking out of 's flat with him when saw a Romanian friend of his , , across the street . then began to cross the street to greet when a truck drove up and ran over . Then and carried to the sidewalk . Shortly thereafter , 's doctor , , happened by . The doctor was too late to save , however . asks to help him investigate further , but says as he is an , he must be careful with the police . Martins tells him the police think was a racketeer . points out most everyone in is mixed up in some sort of racket , but mostly nothing serious -- tires , stamps , etc . describes how after was hit , he instructed him to see after when he arrived . points out the porter , who is near them outside the apartment sweeping , told him that died instantaneously . looks the porter over and says that died before the ambulance arrived , but that he was still alive immediately after he was run over . tells he wants to speak to , but he says has left . At 's insistence , tells him the identity of the pretty woman at the funeral . He does not remember her name , but he tells she was a companion of 's who works as an actress at a local theater . tells he lives in the Russian sector but works at the , and if he has any need for advice to contact him there . then tries to question the porter again . However , the porter 's wife , overhearing the conversation , looks frightened and calls for her husband to come inside . That evening , goes to theater where the woman , named , is performing . He introduces himself as a friend of 's , and she tells him to come back after the show . When he meets her afterwards , finds out that , so depressed over 's death that she declares she wishes she too were dead , had been dating for some time and that had allegedly asked that be taken care of as well just before he died . Martins thinks it funny that had time to think of both him and right after the accident , even though he supposedly died instantly , or at least very quickly . also reveals that the man driving the truck was 's own driver . tells that he has a feeling that there 's something suspicous about 's death -- that seemingly everyone he knew was at the scene -- and he convinces her to help him speak to the porter again . and go to talk with the porter in 's apartment . pokes around the flat , seemingly reminiscing , and half - heartedly translates the for Martins . The porter tells them that 's neck was broken in such a way that he had to have died immediately ; therefore , there was no way he could have asked that and be taken care of . He also says that three men carried to the sidewalk , not two ( & ) , as had claimed . asks the porter why he did not reveal this information at the inquest , and the porter responds he did n't want to be mixed up in the situation and that he was n't the only witness who did not give a complete testimony . As tries to convince the porter take his story to the police , the conversation becomes heated . The porter , who becomes fearful , insists in that leave and never come back . An boy spies them arguing just before and leave . walks back to her place and they are met by 's landlady ( ) , who frantically tells her that the police are inspecting her apartment . and go upstairs to find and supervising as her apartment is torn apart . asks for her passport , which he and inspect and then suspect is fake . The tells her he must keep it . tells that he suspects may have been murdered , but he says he does n't care how died as long he 's dead . He suggests should go back to the airport and go home . As they continue to go through her things , including love letters to her from , explains quietly to about her passport , which she reveals forged for her . She explains that she is Czechoslovakian and that the would claim her and have her deported if it was found out that she was not Austrian . takes back with the other officers to the police station , and on her way out , asks her to remind him of 's doctor 's name so he can go talk with him . goes to ask ( ) about 's death . The doctor was the man standing by at the funeral . In his home , sees the same small dog that was carrying earlier . The doctor tersely adheres to 's take on the events , and he confirms that he arrived after was already dead . asks if it 's possible that was pushed in front of the truck , if he knows if could have died instantaneously or not , and if there was a third man who helped carry 's body to the sidewalk . tells he can give no additional opinion as to the circumstances of the accident , since he did not witness the event and the injuries would have been the same no matter how it happened . He also says there was no third man on the scene by the time he arrived . At the international police station , sees a Russian officer flipping through her papers as she waits . comes in and questions her about . He shows her a picture of man named and asks if she knows who he is . says she 's never seen him before . He explains that is a worker in a military hospital , but she insists she does not know him . He accuses her of lying , which he says is stupid because he could help her with her passport . He explains that in one of her confiscated letters , had written her to instruct her to place a call to the for someone named . barely remembers that the message for was something about meeting at his home . tells her that the day she telephoned that message to , he disappeared . insists has all wrong , and he sends her away , though he keeps her passport and belongings . then goes with , who was waiting outside the station for her , to the . is inside just leaving , and he reminds of the lecture he is to give the next night . and sit at the bar and see playing violin for a dining couple . looks dismayed to see again and , when questioned , insists that only he and carried and that the porter must have been mistaken . says that happens to be at the club that night , despite his earlier claim that was out of town . meets ( ) , whose account of 's death mirrors 's account in all aspects . again asks if a third man helped him and carry 's body , but denies this , asking where heard such a thing . He tells him the porter at 's building had heard the accident and witnessed the aftermath . This is evidently news to , who was unaware that the porter was a witness since he had not given testimony at the inquest . is then seen arranging and attending a mysterious meeting on a bridge with , , and an unseen fourth man . The following morning , while wanders thoughtfully in front of 's former home , the porter leans out the window and apologizes to for his previous demeanor , arranging to meet with him later to tell him something important . When the porter closes the window and turns around , he reacts with surprise and terror to an unseen person who has presumably snuck up behind him . goes to visit to tell her the porter wants to talk to him again . She is especially depressed about , and she begs to tell her stories about him . They talk about , painting him as a mischievous boy who never grew up . She insists they go see the porter together , accidentally calling him , which lightly miffs . As they walk up to the front of the porter 's building , they see a crowd gathered near the door . immediately wants to leave , assuming it to be trouble . , however , walks over to the crowd , where he is told the porter has been murdered . The little boy who had seen and the porter arguing begins insisting something about loudly in . Slowly , the assembled crowd turns to stare at . explains that the crowd thinks he is the murderer . He grabs and they run away . The crowd pursues them , with the little boy in the lead . and duck into a movie theater , losing the mob . tells to go back home where she 'll be safe . eventually makes his way back to his hotel , where he asks the desk clerk for a taxi driver . The clerk indicates that an imposing - looking man standing there is a driver already waiting for him . With in the back seat , the driver speeds off recklessly without saying where he wants to go . , very frightened , asks him if he is taking him to be killed . The driver does not answer and finally stops in front of a doorway . Holly , sure that he 's about to be murdered , starts to run , but the door opens . greets him , and realizes it is time for the speaking engagement that he 'd agreed to . struggles with the intellectual questions posed to him . The audience begins to dissipate , while agonizes over the misstep of hiring . Unexpectedly , arrives , and he asks if he 's working on a book . says that he 's writing a book called " The " and that it 's based on fact . suggests that stick to fiction , but insists he will finish this " book . " As the meeting is closed , two thuggish - looking men arrive and get whispered orders from . takes off up the spiral staircase at the back of the building and the two thugs pursue him . ducks into in unlocked room , where he is bitten by an unexpected parrot . He makes his way out of a window and finds refuge from the thugs in a car hidden among the wartime rubble . Once safe , goes to the international police station to tell about his findings . , though now convinced that was murdered , is still indifferent and explains that it 's better that is dead . insists he is wrong , so the offers to show why he believes is guilty of racketeering and murder . then presents a myriad of evidence , proving that obtained illegally , diluted it , and sold it to war - ravaged , poor hospitals , resulting in the painful deaths of many people . ( - down penicillin is not only ineffective , but it also makes the patient immune to future doses of penicillin , thus rendering medical treatment incredibly difficult or impossible . ) Many of his victims were children with meningitis ; the lucky ones , the says , died , and the unlucky ones lived and went insane . He shows a slide of the hospital worker , who he explains helped steal the penicillin for . The police forced to give them information about 's operation , but he has recently gone missing . , now convinced of 's guilt , is devastated by the news about his old friend and agrees to go back to . After goes out to a bar and gets drunk , he buys flowers and takes them to in her apartment . He drunkenly calls to 's cat , who is indifferent to him , and explains the only person the cat ever liked was . The cat slips out the window . lets know that also told her about 's misdeeds , and though she now believes in his guilt as well , it does n't change her feelings for . We then see a man outside 's window on the street . He ducks into a dark doorway . 's cat , who has run out of the apartment , curls up at his feet . In the apartment , says is better off dead , but not because he was punished for doing wrong , as believes . agrees he 's better off dead , and he no longer cares who killed him or why . He believes there was justice in 's death , and he says maybe he would have even killed himself . He also tells that he 's fallen in love with her , but she makes it apparent that the feeling is n't mutual , as she thinks only of . Disappointed and still drunk , stumbles outside to return to his hotel , but he sees the obscured man standing in the dark doorway , the cat still at his feet . shouts at him to stop spying and to show himself , but he does not move . 's noise causes a woman upstairs to turn on her light and open her window to yell at him to be quiet . The light from the woman 's apartment shines down into the street , revealing the man in the doorway to be ( ) . smiles at a shocked , but slips away when the woman turns off her light . Seeing 's shadow running off down a nearby street , takes pursuit . He follows the sound of footsteps down a passageway that opens into a plaza , but once reaches the end of the passageway , is already gone . brings and out the area to re - enact the events , but they are unconvinced . However , suddenly a light bulb goes off for as he eyes a booth in the plaza . Opening the door on the booth , shows that it is an entranceway to the sewers , with steps leading downwards . They follow the stairs into the sewers , where they see an endless range of tunnels for to use as escape routes . That night , leads a team to excavate 's grave . When they open the coffin , the body inside is revealed to be that of . The international police come to 's apartment for her as she lies in bed crying in 's old pajamas . surely assumes this is because of her forged papers . As she is led into the station , sees her and yells at her that he 's seen alive . is standing in the hallway as the police lead her through the station , and he instructs them to bring her into his office . He interrogates her alone , asking when she saw last . He explains in his coffin was 's body . She looks thrilled as she realizes this does mean that is alive , and she asks where he is . thinks she might know , but it is clear she was not aware he has been alive either . He says they know is hiding in the Russian sector ( which is where lives , as he told ) , and that if she helps them catch , will help her with the , who are about to interrogate her about her passport . She can not help him , though , and he tells her they will catch him eventually , as is a closed city . She says that she wishes that he was dead , as he would be safe from " all of you . "The next morning , goes to visit 's apartment in the Russian sector . looks over his balcony and invites up , but refuses , as he shouts back that he wants to speak only with . comes out on the balcony also , and he and exchange concerned looks . Though they admit nothing about , insists that he come meet him at the nearby fairgrounds . As waits next to the wheel , he spots walking up to warmly greet him , acting as if nothing has changed . They go for a ride on the wheel . shows no remorse for his penicillin racket , asking about the people far below them if would really care if one of " those little dots " stopped moving forever , especially if he were paid for each dot . When reveals that he told the police about seeing , is very unhappy that has been talking to the cops . , staring at , clearly considers shooting him and throwing him out of the wheel to his death . takes him seriously enough to wrap his arm tightly around the car door should try anything . However , when also says that they 've dug up his grave and found , changes his mind and jokes that neither one of them would ever think of doing something to the other . also reveals that he was the one who informed the Russian police about 's forged passport as payment for them letting him hide out in the Russian sector . As they finish the ride , offers to cut in on his schemes , but without waiting for an answer , leaves quickly , telling him that they can meet again any time he wants , but no police . goes to meet with and tells him he knows where is staying . The tries to convince him to help them trap by arranging to meet him at a cafe in the international zone . However , though knows his friend has done wrong , he is unwilling to be the one to doom him . Just then , the Russian officer comes in with 's passport , explaining to that she must be deported . The mentions to him that the were supposed to be helping the British police with , but the says the two cases are not related and that they will get to his case eventually . He leaves the room , 's passport sitting on 's desk . , seemingly resigned to giving up in 's case , talks about how helpful could have been in getting , but is staring at 's papers sitting on the desk . asks what price would pay for his help , and he tells him to name it . Paine accompanies to board the train that will save her from the Russian authorities . Just as she settles into her car , she spies trying to see her off inconspicuously . Understanding that her leaving must have been part of a deal struck with , she gets off the train and confronts about why he 's there . He admits he has agreed to " betray " in turn for her getting away . makes it evident that she 's disgusted with and could never do anything to hurt . She leaves angrily , ripping up her passport , and allows the train to depart with her belongings . Now despondent , asks that and just take him to the airport , having changed his mind to help them catch . He shows them 's torn up papers . agrees , but on the way to the airport , the makes an extra stop . It is the children 's ward of a hospital , where shows the devastating effects of 's dilluted penicillin . Horrified by the sight of painfully dying children , reluctantly agrees again to entrap . At a cafe waits to meet while , , and several other policemen stake out nearby in the shadows . comes into the cafe to admonish , his location disclosed to her by as he was being arrested . While she talks to him , has snuck in the back of the cafe . Just as enters behind , she yells at for being a police informant . reacts , drawing a gun to shoot . is standing in the way and tells that he must escape or the police will get him . tells to move so he can kill , but he spots entering the front of the cafe and turns to run . rushes to the nearest sewer entrance and goes down into the tunnels . , , , and international policemen pursue through the maze of sewer passages . , for a time , evades the many men , but he is eventually cornered . happens upon the panicked and , hiding from the range of 's gun , tells him that he must give up . , followed by , comes rushing to to warn him to get back , but shoots , and he falls . tries to run but is shot by . manages to crawl out of sight while leans over the dying . takes 's gun and sets off after , and tells him to shoot on sight . In a passageway , badly wounded , strains to climb up steps to escape through a sewer grate . He manages to make it to the top of the staircase , where he reaches his fingers up through the grate , feeling the air above . However , he is too weak to lift the manhole cover , and he drops his head into his arms . walks up and aims the gun at . weakly lifts his head and nods slightly at , a silent okay for to mercy - kill him . A shot rings out in the sewers . sees the figure of emerging from the passageway alone . Soon after , again has another funeral in the same cemetery . , , and are the only attendees . After the service , begins to drive to the airport . Seeing walking behind them down the same tree - lined trail as the first time he saw her , asks to get out to speak to her . waits for as she walks down the long road toward him . When she nears him , though , she does not acknowledge his presence and walks by . does n't say anything , but he puts his head down and lights a cigarette.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > of , , flash across the screen as an 's voice ( ) describes the racketeer trade in the post - World era . He describes that many amateurs have tried to get involved in this career , but he implies that they always end up dead . Meanwhile , the city is quartered into sectors policed by occupying forces -- the , the , the and the -- though they barely can handle the criminal element and do n't even speak the same language . The city is devastated ( " bombed about a bit , " says the narrator ) , covered in jagged rubble . He begins to tell the story of an coming to named , who has come to accept a job from an old friend . ( ) gets off his train and is surprised that his friend , , is n't at the station to meet him . goes to 's flat , but the building porter ( ) , through extremely broken , tells him that he just missed 's friends leaving with a coffin . The porter says that was killed , hit by a truck right in front of the building . Martins goes to a massive graveyard and finds a funeral service . An ( ) hovering nearby informs it is 's funeral . Standing by the grave are two middle - aged men , both of whom eye suspiciously . Also in attendance is a pretty woman ( ) who does n't notice him . After the funeral , Martins begins to walk back into town , and the offers him a ride . The stranger introduces himself as , a police officer in the British sector of , and offers to buy him a drink . agrees and proceeds to drink while reminiscing about . It is revealed that is an author of pulp Western novellas . As he talks about his old friend , says that it 's better that is dead , since he was a murderer and a racketeer . takes umbrage at 's suggestion and reaches to punch him , but he 's quickly socked in the face by fellow English soldier ( ) . Paine apologizes and escorts the tipsy Martins to the nearby hotel , explaining to earnestly that he is a huge fan of his books . sets Martins up at the hotel for the night , telling him he can catch a plane out of the next day . promises he will prove him wrong about . Happening by on the way out of the hotel is another named ( - ) . tells that is an author , and though has never heard of him , he is excited to have a writer in . introduces himself to and explains he represents the British cultural propaganda department in . He invites to stay and give lecture in a few days at the department 's meeting . Figuring he could use the extra time in town as an opportunity to look into 's death , accepts the offer . is then called on the hotel phone by a man who identifies himself as . The man says he is a friend of 's . Martins and set up a meeting at a nearby cafe . When they meet , recognizes ( ) as one of the two men at 's funeral . is carrying one of 's books , which he says had given to him , and a small dog . proceeds to grill about the circumstances of 's death . and Martins go out to the street in front of 's apartment building to reconstruct the events of the accident . 's version is this : he was walking out of 's flat with him when saw a Romanian friend of his , , across the street . then began to cross the street to greet when a truck drove up and ran over . Then and carried to the sidewalk . Shortly thereafter , 's doctor , , happened by . The doctor was too late to save , however . asks to help him investigate further , but says as he is an , he must be careful with the police . Martins tells him the police think was a racketeer . points out most everyone in is mixed up in some sort of racket , but mostly nothing serious -- tires , stamps , etc . describes how after was hit , he instructed him to see after when he arrived . points out the porter , who is near them outside the apartment sweeping , told him that died instantaneously . looks the porter over and says that died before the ambulance arrived , but that he was still alive immediately after he was run over . tells he wants to speak to , but he says has left . At 's insistence , tells him the identity of the pretty woman at the funeral . He does not remember her name , but he tells she was a companion of 's who works as an actress at a local theater . tells he lives in the Russian sector but works at the , and if he has any need for advice to contact him there . then tries to question the porter again . However , the porter 's wife , overhearing the conversation , looks frightened and calls for her husband to come inside . That evening , goes to theater where the woman , named , is performing . He introduces himself as a friend of 's , and she tells him to come back after the show . When he meets her afterwards , finds out that , so depressed over 's death that she declares she wishes she too were dead , had been dating for some time and that had allegedly asked that be taken care of as well just before he died . Martins thinks it funny that had time to think of both him and right after the accident , even though he supposedly died instantly , or at least very quickly . also reveals that the man driving the truck was 's own driver . tells that he has a feeling that there 's something suspicous about 's death -- that seemingly everyone he knew was at the scene -- and he convinces her to help him speak to the porter again . and go to talk with the porter in 's apartment . pokes around the flat , seemingly reminiscing , and half - heartedly translates the for Martins . The porter tells them that 's neck was broken in such a way that he had to have died immediately ; therefore , there was no way he could have asked that and be taken care of . He also says that three men carried to the sidewalk , not two ( & ) , as had claimed . asks the porter why he did not reveal this information at the inquest , and the porter responds he did n't want to be mixed up in the situation and that he was n't the only witness who did not give a complete testimony . As tries to convince the porter take his story to the police , the conversation becomes heated . The porter , who becomes fearful , insists in that leave and never come back . An boy spies them arguing just before and leave . walks back to her place and they are met by 's landlady ( ) , who frantically tells her that the police are inspecting her apartment . and go upstairs to find and supervising as her apartment is torn apart . asks for her passport , which he and inspect and then suspect is fake . The tells her he must keep it . tells that he suspects may have been murdered , but he says he does n't care how died as long he 's dead . He suggests should go back to the airport and go home . As they continue to go through her things , including love letters to her from , explains quietly to about her passport , which she reveals forged for her . She explains that she is Czechoslovakian and that the would claim her and have her deported if it was found out that she was not Austrian . takes back with the other officers to the police station , and on her way out , asks her to remind him of 's doctor 's name so he can go talk with him . goes to ask ( ) about 's death . The doctor was the man standing by at the funeral . In his home , sees the same small dog that was carrying earlier . The doctor tersely adheres to 's take on the events , and he confirms that he arrived after was already dead . asks if it 's possible that was pushed in front of the truck , if he knows if could have died instantaneously or not , and if there was a third man who helped carry 's body to the sidewalk . tells he can give no additional opinion as to the circumstances of the accident , since he did not witness the event and the injuries would have been the same no matter how it happened . He also says there was no third man on the scene by the time he arrived . At the international police station , sees a Russian officer flipping through her papers as she waits . comes in and questions her about . He shows her a picture of man named and asks if she knows who he is . says she 's never seen him before . He explains that is a worker in a military hospital , but she insists she does not know him . He accuses her of lying , which he says is stupid because he could help her with her passport . He explains that in one of her confiscated letters , had written her to instruct her to place a call to the for someone named . barely remembers that the message for was something about meeting at his home . tells her that the day she telephoned that message to , he disappeared . insists has all wrong , and he sends her away , though he keeps her passport and belongings . then goes with , who was waiting outside the station for her , to the . is inside just leaving , and he reminds of the lecture he is to give the next night . and sit at the bar and see playing violin for a dining couple . looks dismayed to see again and , when questioned , insists that only he and carried and that the porter must have been mistaken . says that happens to be at the club that night , despite his earlier claim that was out of town . meets ( ) , whose account of 's death mirrors 's account in all aspects . again asks if a third man helped him and carry 's body , but denies this , asking where heard such a thing . He tells him the porter at 's building had heard the accident and witnessed the aftermath . This is evidently news to , who was unaware that the porter was a witness since he had not given testimony at the inquest . is then seen arranging and attending a mysterious meeting on a bridge with , , and an unseen fourth man . The following morning , while wanders thoughtfully in front of 's former home , the porter leans out the window and apologizes to for his previous demeanor , arranging to meet with him later to tell him something important . When the porter closes the window and turns around , he reacts with surprise and terror to an unseen person who has presumably snuck up behind him . goes to visit to tell her the porter wants to talk to him again . She is especially depressed about , and she begs to tell her stories about him . They talk about , painting him as a mischievous boy who never grew up . She insists they go see the porter together , accidentally calling him , which lightly miffs . As they walk up to the front of the porter 's building , they see a crowd gathered near the door . immediately wants to leave , assuming it to be trouble . , however , walks over to the crowd , where he is told the porter has been murdered . The little boy who had seen and the porter arguing begins insisting something about loudly in . Slowly , the assembled crowd turns to stare at . explains that the crowd thinks he is the murderer . He grabs and they run away . The crowd pursues them , with the little boy in the lead . and duck into a movie theater , losing the mob . tells to go back home where she 'll be safe . eventually makes his way back to his hotel , where he asks the desk clerk for a taxi driver . The clerk indicates that an imposing - looking man standing there is a driver already waiting for him . With in the back seat , the driver speeds off recklessly without saying where he wants to go . , very frightened , asks him if he is taking him to be killed . The driver does not answer and finally stops in front of a doorway . Holly , sure that he 's about to be murdered , starts to run , but the door opens . greets him , and realizes it is time for the speaking engagement that he 'd agreed to . struggles with the intellectual questions posed to him . The audience begins to dissipate , while agonizes over the misstep of hiring . Unexpectedly , arrives , and he asks if he 's working on a book . says that he 's writing a book called " The " and that it 's based on fact . suggests that stick to fiction , but insists he will finish this " book . " As the meeting is closed , two thuggish - looking men arrive and get whispered orders from . takes off up the spiral staircase at the back of the building and the two thugs pursue him . ducks into in unlocked room , where he is bitten by an unexpected parrot . He makes his way out of a window and finds refuge from the thugs in a car hidden among the wartime rubble . Once safe , goes to the international police station to tell about his findings . , though now convinced that was murdered , is still indifferent and explains that it 's better that is dead . insists he is wrong , so the offers to show why he believes is guilty of racketeering and murder . then presents a myriad of evidence , proving that obtained illegally , diluted it , and sold it to war - ravaged , poor hospitals , resulting in the painful deaths of many people . ( - down penicillin is not only ineffective , but it also makes the patient immune to future doses of penicillin , thus rendering medical treatment incredibly difficult or impossible . ) Many of his victims were children with meningitis ; the lucky ones , the says , died , and the unlucky ones lived and went insane . He shows a slide of the hospital worker , who he explains helped steal the penicillin for . The police forced to give them information about 's operation , but he has recently gone missing . , now convinced of 's guilt , is devastated by the news about his old friend and agrees to go back to . After goes out to a bar and gets drunk , he buys flowers and takes them to in her apartment . He drunkenly calls to 's cat , who is indifferent to him , and explains the only person the cat ever liked was . The cat slips out the window . lets know that also told her about 's misdeeds , and though she now believes in his guilt as well , it does n't change her feelings for . We then see a man outside 's window on the street . He ducks into a dark doorway . 's cat , who has run out of the apartment , curls up at his feet . In the apartment , says is better off dead , but not because he was punished for doing wrong , as believes . agrees he 's better off dead , and he no longer cares who killed him or why . He believes there was justice in 's death , and he says maybe he would have even killed himself . He also tells that he 's fallen in love with her , but she makes it apparent that the feeling is n't mutual , as she thinks only of . Disappointed and still drunk , stumbles outside to return to his hotel , but he sees the obscured man standing in the dark doorway , the cat still at his feet . shouts at him to stop spying and to show himself , but he does not move . 's noise causes a woman upstairs to turn on her light and open her window to yell at him to be quiet . The light from the woman 's apartment shines down into the street , revealing the man in the doorway to be ( ) . smiles at a shocked , but slips away when the woman turns off her light . Seeing 's shadow running off down a nearby street , takes pursuit . He follows the sound of footsteps down a passageway that opens into a plaza , but once reaches the end of the passageway , is already gone . brings and out the area to re - enact the events , but they are unconvinced . However , suddenly a light bulb goes off for as he eyes a booth in the plaza . Opening the door on the booth , shows that it is an entranceway to the sewers , with steps leading downwards . They follow the stairs into the sewers , where they see an endless range of tunnels for to use as escape routes . That night , leads a team to excavate 's grave . When they open the coffin , the body inside is revealed to be that of . The international police come to 's apartment for her as she lies in bed crying in 's old pajamas . surely assumes this is because of her forged papers . As she is led into the station , sees her and yells at her that he 's seen alive . is standing in the hallway as the police lead her through the station , and he instructs them to bring her into his office . He interrogates her alone , asking when she saw last . He explains in his coffin was 's body . She looks thrilled as she realizes this does mean that is alive , and she asks where he is . thinks she might know , but it is clear she was not aware he has been alive either . He says they know is hiding in the Russian sector ( which is where lives , as he told ) , and that if she helps them catch , will help her with the , who are about to interrogate her about her passport . She can not help him , though , and he tells her they will catch him eventually , as is a closed city . She says that she wishes that he was dead , as he would be safe from " all of you . "The next morning , goes to visit 's apartment in the Russian sector . looks over his balcony and invites up , but refuses , as he shouts back that he wants to speak only with . comes out on the balcony also , and he and exchange concerned looks . Though they admit nothing about , insists that he come meet him at the nearby fairgrounds . As waits next to the wheel , he spots walking up to warmly greet him , acting as if nothing has changed . They go for a ride on the wheel . shows no remorse for his penicillin racket , asking about the people far below them if would really care if one of " those little dots " stopped moving forever , especially if he were paid for each dot . When reveals that he told the police about seeing , is very unhappy that has been talking to the cops . , staring at , clearly considers shooting him and throwing him out of the wheel to his death . takes him seriously enough to wrap his arm tightly around the car door should try anything . However , when also says that they 've dug up his grave and found , changes his mind and jokes that neither one of them would ever think of doing something to the other . also reveals that he was the one who informed the Russian police about 's forged passport as payment for them letting him hide out in the Russian sector . As they finish the ride , offers to cut in on his schemes , but without waiting for an answer , leaves quickly , telling him that they can meet again any time he wants , but no police . goes to meet with and tells him he knows where is staying . The tries to convince him to help them trap by arranging to meet him at a cafe in the international zone . However , though knows his friend has done wrong , he is unwilling to be the one to doom him . Just then , the Russian officer comes in with 's passport , explaining to that she must be deported . The mentions to him that the were supposed to be helping the British police with , but the says the two cases are not related and that they will get to his case eventually . He leaves the room , 's passport sitting on 's desk . , seemingly resigned to giving up in 's case , talks about how helpful could have been in getting , but is staring at 's papers sitting on the desk . asks what price would pay for his help , and he tells him to name it . Paine accompanies to board the train that will save her from the Russian authorities . Just as she settles into her car , she spies trying to see her off inconspicuously . Understanding that her leaving must have been part of a deal struck with , she gets off the train and confronts about why he 's there . He admits he has agreed to " betray " in turn for her getting away . makes it evident that she 's disgusted with and could never do anything to hurt . She leaves angrily , ripping up her passport , and allows the train to depart with her belongings . Now despondent , asks that and just take him to the airport , having changed his mind to help them catch . He shows them 's torn up papers . agrees , but on the way to the airport , the makes an extra stop . It is the children 's ward of a hospital , where shows the devastating effects of 's dilluted penicillin . Horrified by the sight of painfully dying children , reluctantly agrees again to entrap . At a cafe waits to meet while , , and several other policemen stake out nearby in the shadows . comes into the cafe to admonish , his location disclosed to her by as he was being arrested . While she talks to him , has snuck in the back of the cafe . Just as enters behind , she yells at for being a police informant . reacts , drawing a gun to shoot . is standing in the way and tells that he must escape or the police will get him . tells to move so he can kill , but he spots entering the front of the cafe and turns to run . rushes to the nearest sewer entrance and goes down into the tunnels . , , , and international policemen pursue through the maze of sewer passages . , for a time , evades the many men , but he is eventually cornered . happens upon the panicked and , hiding from the range of 's gun , tells him that he must give up . , followed by , comes rushing to to warn him to get back , but shoots , and he falls . tries to run but is shot by . manages to crawl out of sight while leans over the dying . takes 's gun and sets off after , and tells him to shoot on sight . In a passageway , badly wounded , strains to climb up steps to escape through a sewer grate . He manages to make it to the top of the staircase , where he reaches his fingers up through the grate , feeling the air above . However , he is too weak to lift the manhole cover , and he drops his head into his arms . walks up and aims the gun at . weakly lifts his head and nods slightly at , a silent okay for to mercy - kill him . A shot rings out in the sewers . sees the figure of emerging from the passageway alone . Soon after , again has another funeral in the same cemetery . , , and are the only attendees . After the service , begins to drive to the airport . Seeing walking behind them down the same tree - lined trail as the first time he saw her , asks to get out to speak to her . waits for as she walks down the long road toward him . When she nears him , though , she does not acknowledge his presence and walks by . does n't say anything , but he puts his head down and lights a cigarette.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > I : By what means acquired the style and title of . In the opening scene , set in 1750s , the father of ( ) is killed in a duel by a businessman over a disputed sale of some horses . This detail is related by the film 's narrator ( the voice of ) , who comments ironically on the events that transpire . The widow ( ) , disdaining offers of marriage , devotes herself to the raising of her son . While still in his teens , falls in love with his older cousin , ( ) . A wealthy English army officer named ( ) meets and begins courting , leading the jealous to challenge to a duel . 's second in the duel is his older friend , ( ) , and also present are 's cousins , and . They fire pistols at ten paces . When 's gunfire knocks flat , the cousins pronounce him dead and urge to flee to avoid a murder charge . Believing that he has killed and will be arrested by the for murder , flees . On the road to , is robbed and his horse stolen by a middle - aged highwayman ( ) and the man 's son . , manages to stop at a nearby town where he attends a gathering of locals where a British army recruiting officer is advertising enlistments for men in the , promising glory in the current war in continental as well as a lifelong pension . enlists in the British army and finds himself in boot camp . During training , gets into a brawl with a local bully named ( ) , and is forced to fight bare - knuckle against the guy . wins the fight by dodging all of 's blows and knocks out his opponent , which earns him popularity from the rest of his fellow recruits . After basic training , and his unit are sent to to fight in the ' ( 1756 - 1763 ) between the alliance of and and the alliance of , and . While still in a training camp , is reunited with his old friend , . One evening in the privacy of 's tent , he tells that is not dead after all and has married . The whole duel was a ploy by 's relatives to make flee from so she can marry . During 's first " taste of conflict " during a skirmish on 1 , 1759 at the of , is killed , along with many other British soldiers , during the battle with a French rearguard . Over the next year - and - a - half , becomes fed up with the brutality of war . One day , takes an opportunity when he is able to steal the uniform and horse of , an army dispatcher , while is bathing in a nearby stream with his gay lover . Posing as a British officer , travels through the allied German states along the , hoping to get to neutral and from there hopefully get back to . has a brief affair with a local German woman ( ) whom he shacks up with while her husband is away at war . Later , while traveling up the to the north on horseback , meets a Prussian officer , ( ) and his staff , who quickly sees through his disguise . That evening at a local tavern , becomes more nosy and asks many questions about himself and his " mission " as a courier . After catching in a series of lies , exposes as a British army deserter . Given the choice of joining the Prussian army or being turned back over to the where he will no doubt be executed as a deserter , enlists in his second army . After saves 's life by dragging him out of a burning house during a battle with French troops , is promoted and receives a special commendation from the Prussian king , the . Two years later , after the war ends in 1763 , is employed by the of , 's uncle . It is arranged for him to become the servant of the ( ) , a professional gambler . The suspect that he is a spy and is assigned to try to determine if he is . However , discovers that the is an expatriate Irishman like himself . After an attack of conscience , immediately confesses his mission to the and becomes his protege while continuing his charade of spying on him for . assists the in cheating at card games , but when the of ( ) suspects the truth after losing a large sum of money , decides to expel the from the country . relays this to the who persuades to take advantage of this to flee . The flees from his house during the night and crosses the border . The next day , impersonates the by donning his wig and clothes , so when arrives to take him to the border of and , rejoins the , both free at last . Over the next several years , and the become successful gamblers as they travel through and gain access to high society . They wander from place to place , cheating the nobles at card games . proves to be very useful ; when a loser refuses to pay his debts , 's excellent swordsmanship , which he learned during his military service , convinces him otherwise . Seeing that his life of being a drifter and gambler is going nowhere , decides to marry into wealth . Some time later , at a gambling table in , , he encounters the beautiful and wealthy of ( ) . After has an argument with 's aged and terminally sick husband ( ) , he suffers a heart attack and dies . : Containing an account of the misfortunes and disasters which befell . The following year ( on 15 , 1773 ) , and are married at a small church in and takes her last name of and settles in with wealth at last . The is the best man at 's wedding and afterwords , he wishes luck with his new life and goes off on his own . ( ) , 's 10 - year - old son by , hates from the beginning , knowing that is an adventurer and " common opportunist " and is not in love with his mother . In this second part , undergoes a character transformation from being ambitious , naive and innocent , into a self - destructive and arrogant man who becomes corrupted by his newly acquired wealth and power . The marriage between and is not a happy one , although they welcome a new son born the following year , whom they name . is unfaithful to her , and expends most of 's fortune in an effort to ingratiate himself with those who could assist him in his quest to become a peer of the realm while keeping his wife and children in dull seclusion . One day , she observes consorting with her maid and feels humiliated , but when approaches her in her bath to apologize , she forgives him . However , young does not forgive , and when he reminds that is his true father , takes him out of the room to horsewhip him . As the years pass , dotes on the sweet - natured , while 's hatred intensifies . brings his mother over from to live with him on the estate grounds . After meeting with as well as her son ( now a teenager played by ) , 's mother privately warns her son that his position is precarious . If were to die , all of her wealth would go to her first - born son ; and his son would be left penniless . 's mother advises him to obtain a noble title to protect himself . Following his mother 's advice , cultivates the acquaintance of the influential ( ) with this goal in mind , spending much money to grease his way to the top of the social ladder . gains access to more of high society and even once meets with the British king at a reception in . To that end , discusses the issue with former government minister , , who refers him to , the thirteenth of . The , making no promises , is willing to consider backing , but says that there must be no question of his worthiness . spends more money lavishly to buy lands and expensive paintings , to entertain those most likely to advance him and make bribes in high places . One day in the boys ' schoolroom , when and the usually congenial quarrel , . The viscount , now grown , threatens that next time he will kill . One day during a lavish birthday party for that holds in her honor , crashes the party and announces his hatred of his stepfather . vows to leave his home and never return as long as his mother is married to whom he continues to badmouth as a " Irish underling " . The hot - tempered physically attacks and beats him up in front of all of the important guests which puts a quick end to the party . Humiliated by this public brawl , never the less makes good on his word and leaves the family estate and itself for parts unknown . However , 's public cruelty towards his unruly stepson loses him all the powerful friends he has worked so hard to make and he is shunned socially . From then on , is considered an outcast by good society , although they do not admit this to his face . At once , his bills become due and are paid by 's income . In contrast to the mistreatment he gave , proves to be a doting and compassionate father to . now focuses all his attention on raising his son . Over the next year - and - a - half , can not refuse the young boy anything and spoils him every chance he gets , giving everything that he never had as a young child growing up in poverty in . even purchases a pony for to ride despite the fact that the young boy is not a good enough rider . says that all he wants is a horse ( not a pony ) , so he can go hunting with his father . However , on 's 9th birthday , despite his parents stern orders not to ride his new horse without the company of his parents , the spoiled and rotten boy disobeys them anyway and is thrown while riding from his horse and dies three days later from a head injury . The grief - stricken turns to drink and isolates himself even further , while seeks solace in religion , assisted by the ( ) , tutor first to and then to . takes over the management of while and mourn . After a few weeks , dismisses partly because they no longer need a tutor ( mostly because of 's past spending habits ) , partly for what she says is fear that his influence is making worse . Plunging even deeper into grief , she attempts suicide by taking poison , but survives and is taken to a nearby clinic to recover . The and the family 's accountant and emissary ( ) then seek out . Upon hearing of these events , returns to where he finds drunk in a gentleman 's club , mourning the loss of his son rather than being with . demands " satisfaction " for 's public assault by challenging him to a duel . The duel with pistols is held in a tithe barn . A coin - toss gives the right of first fire , but he nervously misfires his pistol as he prepares to shoot . , reluctant to shoot , magnanimously fires into the ground , but the unmoved refuses to let the duel end , claiming he has not received " satisfaction " . In the second round , shoots in his left leg . At a nearby inn , a surgeon informs that the leg will need to be amputated below the knee if he is to survive . While is recovering , re - takes control of the estate . A few days later , sends a very nervous to the cottage where is recovering to offer him a deal : will grant a small annuity of 500 guineas for life if he leaves forever and ends his marriage to ; otherwise , with his credit and bank accounts exhausted , his creditors will see to it that he is put in jail . Wounded in spirit and body and with no friends left , reluctantly accepts the deal . goes back to with his mother to recover from his injuries . He is then said to have gone back to the European continent to resume his former profession of , though without his former success . From there , history loses touch with 's life after that . He never sees again . In the final scene , set another few years later in 1789 , a gray and middle - aged is going over her finances with , and . She then pauses to sign 's annuity cheque to be sent to . looks over at her sorrowful face and comes to realize that she indeed loved despite his faults . Mother and son say nothing to each other and continue to review their financial papers . : " It was in the reign of that the aforesaid personages lived and quarreled ; good or bad , handsome or ugly , rich or poor , they are all equal now . "</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > In the foundry town of , during the late 1960s , Russian - American steel workers ( ) , ( ) , ( ) , ( ) , ( ) , and ( ) are preparing for two rites of passage : the marriage of one and military service for three of them . They work together , hang out in a local bar and enjoy weekends deer hunting . But their placid life is soon to be changed after three enlist in the airborne infantry and go to . Before they go , marries the pregnant , with whom he has not had sex , and their wedding party is also the men 's farewell party . The hall is decorated with the boy 's high school pictures and lots of American flags . 's girlfriend , , makes breakfast for her father while wearing a bridesmaid 's dress . Her father , an abusive and hallucinating alcoholic , is upstairs and alone , having an alcoholic attack and has trashed his room . brings him his breakfast and he hits her a couple of times leaving a bruise on her face . She leaves for the wedding and takes her belongings to 's where she asks to stay for a while . is upset and walks out when shows up . At the Russian wedding reception , there is lots of drinking , ethnic dancing and wedding rituals . This is a very long scene and sets up the relationships and foreshadows some of what is to come . spends a lot of the time at the bar drinking and watching from afar . During the final ceremony of drinking from a dual wine cup , the convention is the couple will have a good life if they do n't spill any wine but the camera catches some drips on the bride 's dress . proposes to after she catches the bouquet and she accepts . The bride and groom leave the party in 's decorated and chases after them stripping himself naked as he runs , winding up with in a basketball court . makes promise to bring him back to if something happens . The morning after , with the car still decorated from the wedding , the men drive into the mountains to go deer hunting . takes hunting very seriously , having expressed his one shot theory to previously , and gives a cold shoulder when wants to borrow socks and then ca n't find his hunting boots . He asks for his extra pair and refuses , having grown tired of 's lack of preparedness on previous trips . , pulls out a small handgun he carries and breaks up the confrontation . The next morning , and go out into the woods and hunt ( to 's dramatic piece " Praise the of the " ) . has told he is the only one of the group he will hunt with , having no respect for the others . stalks and shoots a deer , bringing it down in a single shot . The troupe returns to and they go straight to 's bar . plays a somber piece on the piano and the men sit mostly silent , contemplating their last night together as a group . The story shifts to a mountainous region of where a small village is a battleground . is there , lying unconscious among several dead bodies . A ( ) soldier walks into the village . He finds a small group of survivors , women and children , hiding in a small bunker . He casually arms a grenade , tosses it in and walks off as it explodes . Moments later he sees a woman , badly injured , carrying a baby . The soldier mercilessly shoots her . springs up and blasts the soldier with a flamethrower . As walks around shooting any surviving NVA soldiers , a unit of helicopters arrive and drop troops , among them are and . , with a thousand - yard stare , does n't seem to recognize them at first when incoming mortar shells from the begin to hit the fields around the village . In the distance , a squad of are approaching . The three are captured and held prisoner in a crude riverside encampment along with other and prisoners . For entertainment , the guards force their prisoners to play Russian roulette and gamble on the outcome . is suffering a mental breakdown and is chosen first . He pulls the trigger but the gun is aimed above his head , grazing him with the bullet . Though their captors laugh , he is punished by incarceration to a rat - infested partially submerged cage . Believing that the experience has broken , considers abandoning him in his planned escape attempt . angrily rejects 's idea . , convinces the guards to let him go head - to - head with in the next round , after devising a plan to escape that requires three bullets in the pistol and shares his plan with . tells him to go after the closest gun when makes his move . successfully convinces their captors use three bullets in the cylinder . Coaxing their captors into laughing as a small distraction , raises the gun to his head and at the last minute pushes the rifles pointed at him aside while turning the gun on his captors . and grab their captors ' AK-47s and kill them all before freeing . The three escape the camp by floating downriver on a tree . An American helicopter patrolling the river attempts to rescue them , but only is able to get inside and the other two hang from the landing gear . The weakened falls into the river . jumps in after him , and helps him to the riverbank . yells that he ca n't feel or move his legs . carries him on his back to a steam of refugees and convinces the South Vietnamese troops to take on their jeep while he joins the bands of refugees fleeing the conflict . The mentally - devastated recuperates in a military hospital in , where the psychologist concludes he is not fit to remain there . After he 's released , he tries to call in but hangs up before the call is connected . He wanders aimlessly in the red light district . encounters ( ) , a champagne - drinking Frenchman outside a gambling den where men play Russian roulette for money . entices to go in . Unbeknownst to , is in the crowd , as a spectator . interrupts the match , puts the gun to his head and pulls the trigger and then leaves in a hurry with the . follows but ca n't catch them as they drive away and throws the money the offers him into the street . Returning to avoids a welcome celebration and shows up to meet alone . is still missing . finds out that is alive and has returned from and visits , 's wife , to find out where he is . She is stuck in bed and non - communicative but writes down a number for him . It is the number for 's veteran 's rehabilitation clinic . reunites with , who is still traumatized and has lost both his legs and the use of an arm . reveals that someone in has been mailing large amounts of cash and carved elephants to him . suspects the money is from , who may still be alive and earning the money from Russian roulette gambling . takes home over 's protests . The boys go hunting and hunts alone but ca n't go through with shooting the deer . He has another confrontation with in the hunting cabin after gets mad and aims his pistol at one of them . takes his pistol and throws it away . goes back to just before its fall in 1975 to find . With the help of the , he finds in a crowded roulette club , but has no recollection of or his home in . tries unsuccessfully to buy from the gamblers . and end up pitted against each other in an attempts by to help remember who he is . 's attempts to jog his memory and persuade him to come home fail and he notices track marks on 's arm , suggesting his minders are forcing him to use heroin to turn him into a mindless roulette player . and go through a few rounds of roulette until raises the gun to his head and kills himself . The film ends with 's funeral back in and his friends ' response to it . Everyone 's there , and even and seem to be on the mend . At the wake in the bar they all mournfully sing " bless " , and toast . " by is played ( on guitar by ) as the credits roll.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > In rural 1920s , the young nearly kills his little brother while roughhousing . This event and his Seventh - day Adventist upbringing reinforce 's belief in the commandment " shalt not kill " . Years later , takes an injured man to the hospital and meets a nurse , . The two strike a romance and tells of his interest in medical work . After the Japanese attack on , enlists in the to serve as a combat medic . His father , a veteran , is deeply upset by the decision . Before leaving for , he asks for 's hand in marriage and she accepts . is placed under the command of . He excels physically , but becomes an outcast among his fellow soldiers for refusing to handle a rifle and train on . and attempt to discharge for psychiatric reasons but are overruled , as ' religious beliefs do not constitute mental illness . They subsequently torment by putting him through grueling labor , intending to get to leave of his own accord . Despite being beaten one night by his fellow soldiers , he refuses to identify his attackers and continues training . ' unit completes basic training and is released on leave , during which intends to marry , but his refusal to carry a firearm leads to an arrest for insubordination . and visit in jail and try to convince him to plead guilty so that he can be released without charge , but refuses to compromise his beliefs . At his trial pleads not guilty , but before he is sentenced , his father barges into the tribunal with a letter from a former commanding officer stating that his son 's pacifism is protected by an of . The charges against are dropped , and he and are married . ' unit is assigned to the and deployed to the theater . During the of , ' unit is informed that they are to relieve the , which was tasked with ascending and securing the ( " " ) . Both sides suffer heavy losses during the initial fight . saves his squadmate , earning his respect . As the camp for the night , reveals to that his aversion to holding a firearm stems from nearly shooting his drunken father , who threatened his mother with a gun . Smitty apologizes for doubting his courage , and the two reconcile . The next morning , the launch a massive counterattack and drive the off the escarpment . is killed , while and several of ' squad mates are left injured on the battlefield . hears the cries of dying soldiers and returns to save them , carrying the wounded to the cliff 's edge and belaying them down by rope , each time praying to save one more . The arrival of dozens of wounded once presumed dead comes as a shock to the rest of the unit below . When day breaks , rescues and the two escape under enemy fire . tells that the men have been inspired by his selflessness , and that they will not launch the next attack without him . With reinforcements , they turn the tide of battle . After an ambush set by Japanese soldiers feigning surrender , manages to save and others by deflecting enemy grenades . is eventually wounded by a grenade blast , but the battle is won . descends the cliff , clutching the gave him . The film switches to archival photos and footage showing that was awarded the of by for rescuing 75 soldiers at . stayed married to until her death in 1991 . He died on 23 , 2006 , at the age of 87.</synopsis > 

 < , in the very isolated town of , in . Surrounded by the desert , the town is very poor , and also very quiet in the very hot midday sun . Located in the only street of the town , the bar   is the meeting place for all the who , for various reasons , found their way here and ca n't get away from the town . Seated on chairs , but not drinking because they have no money , ( ) , ( ) , and Italian ( ) are looking at the very few people walking in the street . The owner of the   , ( ) , eventually kicks them out of his bar . is mildly in love with ( ) , the waitress of the bar , who is also having sex with . Another european , ( ) , a , is doing some menial work for , like collecting the mail from the daily plane , the only link of with the outside world . Bernardo sneaks into 's van , because he is always trying to find a pilot who would take him to the , a country for which he is holding a valid visa . A very elegant , ( ) is among the passengers leaving the plane . Actually he is another european running away from something . He discreetly gives a few dollars to the immigration officer , who lets him walk out of the airport without a visa . He takes a taxi to the town , where he meets . The two exiled compatriots immediately make friends with each other . We learn that is from , and from . explains to that he gave his last dollars to the immigration officer , and takes him to the   , where , because of 's elegant outfit , thinks he is rich and pays for his taxi . discreetly explains to that he had to leave very quickly , and did n't even had time to pack a suitcase . leaves in the   to go to the small apartment he shares with ( ) , and eat the lunch has been fixing for both of them . is an , who , unlike the other european expatriates , has a : he works as a mason . Then goes back to the   , to share a with . All the other european expatriates seem to be jealous of 's new friend . , who does n't like music , shut off the radio , but switch it back on . asks to switch it off . Feeling offended , the expatriates leave the bar , making very happy . When they are gone , tells how difficult it is to get a job in this poor isolated town . The plane being the only way to leave the town , and the plane being very expensive , the expatriates have no alternative than to stay and wait . There is little opportunity for employment aside from the American corporation that dominates the town , ( ) , which operates the nearby oil fields and owns a walled compound within the town . is suspected of unethical practices such as exploiting local workers and taking the law into its own hands , but the townspeople 's dependence upon it is such that they suffer in silence . But knows the man in charge of in , ( ) . They have being doing some not very legal stuff together a long time ago . And goes to see him in his office . But ca n't do a thing for his old pal without risking to loose his own job , because the of would certainly get to know what and had done together in the past . Within the following days , and become very close , which gets a bit jealous . And he is not the only one to be jealous . also feels that neglects her for . But gets real mad when gives one of 's white trousers , after 's trousers got ruined by mud . decides not to live anymore with , but , before leaving , he takes with him his most precious possession , the last subway ticket he used when he left . In the evening , walks in the   wearing his best suit , and sits at the expatriates ' table , ignoring the other table , where and are sitting alone . He orders , and asks to dance with him . tears the cord off the radio to stop the music , but keeps on dancing and clapping his hands , imitated by all the other expatriates , except , of course , and . takes the bottle of , shakes it violently , and then uncorks it and sprays the on and his friends . wants to hit with the empty bottle , but points a gun at him . Then , to push him to his limit , gives him the gun and slaps his face , but just drops the gun and leaves the bar . A massive fire erupts at one of the oil fields . knows that the only way to extinguish the flames is to cut the fire at its base with an explosion caused by nitroglycerine . But the 200 gallons stock of nitroglycerine is at , and not at the oil field . With such a short notice and the lack of proper equipment , the explosive must be transported inside jerry cans on the two best trucks available at the headquarters and then driven 300 miles away . Due to the poor condition of the roads and the highly volatile nature of nitroglycerine , the job is considered too dangerous for the unionized SOC employees . So is going to ask some of the european expatriates of to drive the trucks . But , against the cynical advice of one of his assistants , he is going to give each driver $ 2000 to drive the trucks ( $ 2000 in 1950 would be almost $ 20000 in the expatriates pass a driving test . Even , who just learned that his lungs are full of cement , and that he has to stop working as a mason or he will die very soon . The first one to pass the test is . He is driving a small truck with sitting next to him and all the other men gathered at the back of the truck . One of the men throws his jacket on the windshield and , frightened , slams on the breaks . Only four men get the job : , , and . All the men leave 's office except , who is a bit mad not to have been picked up by his old  friend  . tells him that is like him : a bit too old for that kind of job , but he also tells him that if one of the drivers desists at the last minute , he will get the job . offers a drink to the drivers . Bernardo trusts a letter for his mother to for her to mail it the next morning , and then he goes out the bar and hangs himself on a tree in the garden . At 3:00 am next morning , , and are gathered in 's office , waiting for . walks in to say good - bye to , and looks genuinely surprised about 's absence . points out he was the last one who was seen with going out of the   . , who knows very well , understands that has been killed by , and , a bit reluctantly , gives him the driving job . and take the bigger truck and leave first , the second truck leaving half an hour later for safety reason . But , before leaving , checks meticulously his truck , to 's annoyance . Eventually climbs in the truck and gives him his lucky subway ticket . Then starts the truck and slowly leaves the yard . They cross still asleep , except for who climbs on the truck footboard to say good - bye to , who kicks her away from the truck . does n't feel very good and thinks that his malaria may be coming back , but he does n't want to drive . After only 17 kilometers ( 10,5 miles ) of very slow driving , decides to stop the truck and eat something , but sees the other truck already coming behind them and tells they must leave at once . starts driving again but he feels worse and worse and even vomits the coffee gave him . They stop the truck and the other truck joins them . has some very harsh words for , and then decides it 's better for him and Bimba to take the lead . and reach what is called  the  . Outside the forest , where there are no trees to protect the road , the surface of the road has been wrinkled by the wind . For the trucks not to bounce on the road , they have to drive at forty miles an hour minimum or at less than six miles an hour , the best solution being of course to drive at forty . While is keeping the speed above forty , the engine starts having problems , and they have to use a length of concrete near a pipe - line pump to stop the truck . They find that the problem with the engine is due to some gas - oil having been added to the regular gasoline normally used by this type of truck . They put some fresh pure gasoline in the tank , but they realize that the length of concrete is too short to bring the truck to forty mph , so they have to drive the rest of the   at very slow speed . Before leaving , puts his large white handkerchief on the concrete for and to see it as a warning signal for danger . But , as soon as they are gone , a local kid steals the handkerchief . Meanwhile , is falling apart because of his fear , and he ca n't bring the truck to forty mph , so decides to drive . He crosses the length of concrete at forty mph , while the kid waves to them with the stolen handkerchief . As they come near the end of the   section , they see the headlights of the other truck in the distance . But 's truck ca n't go above seven mph and 's truck ca n't go under 40 mph , or both trucks start vibrating . But fortunately , at the last seconds , 's truck reaches the end of the washboard and can speed up . 's truck starts climbing a mountain with many hairpin turns . One of them is so tight that they have to maneuver the truck and use a wooden platform built near the road . But the wood is partly rotten , and the truck almost breaks through the platform . They eventually succeed their maneuver and resume their journey on the road . When sees the rotten platform , he wants to give up , but gets real mad at him and forces him to help him and guide him while he maneuvers the truck . But runs away in the mountain , and has to do the whole maneuver by himself . When he eventually drives back on the road , the rotten platform collapses behind him . He starts driving away , without , who runs after him on the road . eventually takes back on board , but he is very mad at him , and tells him very precisely what he thinks about him and his cowardice . A huge boulder , which fell from the mountain , blocks the road . Bimba asks to dig a hole , about 30 inches deep , in the boulder , while he 's going to siphon about one liter of nitroglycerine out of a can , and into a bottle . and join them , and asks them to move both trucks as far as possible from the boulder . Then they all hide behind rocks far away from the boulder , except . Very slowly , he pours the explosive into the hole in the boulder . Then he ties a hammer above the hole with a long wick . With his cigarette , he lights the end of the wick and runs to hide behind a rock . The boulder explodes . Bimba , and congratulate each other and , to celebrate , they go and take a piss together , not even saying a word to , who pisses alone . is driving his truck , while is shaving and telling about his father being murdered by the , and himself being forced to work for three years in a salt mine . Meanwhile , , who calmed down a bit , is rolling a cigarette for , when they see an explosion further away on the road . They immediately understand it 's and 's truck . runs out of the truck , but catches him back , hits him very hard and brings him back to the truck . and arrive at the scene of the explosion only to find a large crater rapidly filling with oil from a pipeline ruptured in the blast . walks in front of the truck to help navigate through the oil - filled crater . The truck , however , is in danger of becoming bogged down and during his frantic attempts to prevent it from getting stuck , runs over . Although ultimately succeeds in getting the truck out of the the muck , is mortally wounded . He dies just before they reach the burning oil field . On his arrival at the oil field , is hailed as a hero , but he collapses from exhaustion when he gets out of the truck . Upon his recovery , heads home in the same truck , now empty . The gives him double wages , his and 's . jubilantly drives down the mountain road , while a party is being held at the   , where 's friends eagerly await his arrival . The radio plays '  The  , both at the   and in 's truck . dances with 's friends and dances recklessly with his truck . He takes one corner too fast and plunges through the guardrail to his death , holding his lucky subway ticket in his hand . At the same moment , , as if she knew what just happened , suddenly faints in the arms of the man she was dancing > 

 < synopsis > In 1986 , two women are found raped and murdered in a ditch near a field . Local detective - man , not having dealt with such a serious case before , is overwhelmed - key evidence is improperly collected , the police 's investigative methods are suspect , and their forensic technology is near non - existent . claims he has a way of determining suspects by eye contact . He learns from his girlfriend that a scarred mentally handicapped boy , - , resides in the town and decides to question him first . He finds him and uses his eye contact method , instinctively thinking is responsible . has his partner beat confessions out of and secretly record him talking about one of the murders . - , a detective from , volunteers to assist them . However he and 's methods clash and they get into a fight during a party . Seo looks at 's hands and deems them too weak and scarred to be able to commit such an elaborate crime , clearing his name . After more murders are committed they realize that the killer waits until a rainy night and only kills women wearing red . A female police officer , - ok , realizes that a local radio station is always requested to play a particular song during the nights the murders are committed . continues to search for the killer , but finds nothing . At the latest crime scene , , and all arrive to investigate in different ways , but then a local man arrives , pulls out undergarments , and masturbates in a woman 's red lingerie . accidentally steps on a twig , prompting the man to run . They chase him into a crowd . Seo attempts to find a way to get everyone 's attention , but identifies the man first after seeing him bend over and partially exposing the red lingerie underneath his pants . Despite already having identified him , he acts as if he is using his eye contact method once more and has apprehend him . and continue their tactic and brutally beat the man . finds a survivor of the killer after tracing rumors around the local school with the help of . Upon learning from the survivor that the killer 's hands were noticeably soft , manages to clear the man as his hands are very rough . Infuriated that they lost their suspect , scuffles with , until alerts them that the same song the murderer requested is playing . They realize it 's raining and arrive too late to find another woman murdered . and and decide to all work together . Upon doing an autopsy of the latest victim , they discover pieces of what looks like a peach in the body . Seo talks to a schoolgirl about a possible suspect and help her put a band - aid on an injury on her waist . They follow a trail of clues to a factory worker , - , who had only moved to the area a short time before the first murder . They track the song using documents ( a source that always trusts , saying , " The documents never lie . " ) from the radio station to his address . The detectives are initially unable to pin anything on him . However , notes that his hands are soft like the survivor he questioned earlier had described . - gyu begins to show discomfort when presents the peaches and he thinks he 's found the killer . Before he can question more , loses control and beats - , prompting their superior to ban him from the interrogation room . and listen to 's earlier confession to a previous murder . Seo points out that he talks as if someone else did it and they realize he knew details of the murder because he witnessed it . They go to 's father 's restaurant , only to discover a drunken there . As people make fun of on the TV , he beats everyone in the restaurant . arrives partway through the brawl and joins the fray , swinging a wooden board at 's leg and accidentally piercing it with a rusty nail . and chase and question him , but he gets frightened and runs into the path of an oncoming train where he is hit and killed . learns that 's leg will have to be amputated because the rusty nail caused tetanus , leaving feeling guilty about what he had gotten his partner and best friend into . They discover a trace of semen on one of the bodies , but because of lack of forensic technology the sample has to be sent to the to confirm if suspect - is the killer with evidence . Seo tries to follow - gyu , but he dozes off and misses his chance . That night 's girlfriend walks through the forest watched by an unknown figure in the shadows , but a younger girl passes by and she is captured and killed instead . The next morning her body is discovered . sees a band - aid on her waist and recognizes her as the same schoolgirl that he befriended while investigating the murders . Enraged at the loss , 's frustrations finally flow over and he snaps . He attacks - gyu until he is interrupted by bringing documents from regarding the semen sample . However , the papers state the sample does not match - 's . shouts that the documents are lying and that he knows - gyu is the murderer . uses his eye contact method on the suspect , but realizes he can not draw any conclusions unlike before . Seo attempts to shoot the suspect , but stops him and lets - go . In the end , the crimes remain unsolved . While visiting the crime scene years later in 2003 , - , now a businessman , learns from a little girl that the scene had recently been visited by another , unknown , man with a ' normal ' face . The little girl had asked the man why he was looking at the ditch and was told that he was reminiscing about something he had done there a long time ago . The film ends as , realizing this , looks straight at the camera , seemingly using his eye - contact method to spot the killer among the > 

 < synopsis > In 1986 , two women are found raped and murdered in a ditch near a field . Local detective - man , not having dealt with such a serious case before , is overwhelmed - key evidence is improperly collected , the police 's investigative methods are suspect , and their forensic technology is near non - existent . claims he has a way of determining suspects by eye contact . He learns from his girlfriend that a scarred mentally handicapped boy , - , resides in the town and decides to question him first . He finds him and uses his eye contact method , instinctively thinking is responsible . has his partner beat confessions out of and secretly record him talking about one of the murders . - , a detective from , volunteers to assist them . However he and 's methods clash and they get into a fight during a party . Seo looks at 's hands and deems them too weak and scarred to be able to commit such an elaborate crime , clearing his name . After more murders are committed they realize that the killer waits until a rainy night and only kills women wearing red . A female police officer , - ok , realizes that a local radio station is always requested to play a particular song during the nights the murders are committed . continues to search for the killer , but finds nothing . At the latest crime scene , , and all arrive to investigate in different ways , but then a local man arrives , pulls out undergarments , and masturbates in a woman 's red lingerie . accidentally steps on a twig , prompting the man to run . They chase him into a crowd . Seo attempts to find a way to get everyone 's attention , but identifies the man first after seeing him bend over and partially exposing the red lingerie underneath his pants . Despite already having identified him , he acts as if he is using his eye contact method once more and has apprehend him . and continue their tactic and brutally beat the man . finds a survivor of the killer after tracing rumors around the local school with the help of . Upon learning from the survivor that the killer 's hands were noticeably soft , manages to clear the man as his hands are very rough . Infuriated that they lost their suspect , scuffles with , until alerts them that the same song the murderer requested is playing . They realize it 's raining and arrive too late to find another woman murdered . and and decide to all work together . Upon doing an autopsy of the latest victim , they discover pieces of what looks like a peach in the body . Seo talks to a schoolgirl about a possible suspect and help her put a band - aid on an injury on her waist . They follow a trail of clues to a factory worker , - , who had only moved to the area a short time before the first murder . They track the song using documents ( a source that always trusts , saying , " The documents never lie . " ) from the radio station to his address . The detectives are initially unable to pin anything on him . However , notes that his hands are soft like the survivor he questioned earlier had described . - gyu begins to show discomfort when presents the peaches and he thinks he 's found the killer . Before he can question more , loses control and beats - , prompting their superior to ban him from the interrogation room . and listen to 's earlier confession to a previous murder . Seo points out that he talks as if someone else did it and they realize he knew details of the murder because he witnessed it . They go to 's father 's restaurant , only to discover a drunken there . As people make fun of on the TV , he beats everyone in the restaurant . arrives partway through the brawl and joins the fray , swinging a wooden board at 's leg and accidentally piercing it with a rusty nail . and chase and question him , but he gets frightened and runs into the path of an oncoming train where he is hit and killed . learns that 's leg will have to be amputated because the rusty nail caused tetanus , leaving feeling guilty about what he had gotten his partner and best friend into . They discover a trace of semen on one of the bodies , but because of lack of forensic technology the sample has to be sent to the to confirm if suspect - is the killer with evidence . Seo tries to follow - gyu , but he dozes off and misses his chance . That night 's girlfriend walks through the forest watched by an unknown figure in the shadows , but a younger girl passes by and she is captured and killed instead . The next morning her body is discovered . sees a band - aid on her waist and recognizes her as the same schoolgirl that he befriended while investigating the murders . Enraged at the loss , 's frustrations finally flow over and he snaps . He attacks - gyu until he is interrupted by bringing documents from regarding the semen sample . However , the papers state the sample does not match - 's . shouts that the documents are lying and that he knows - gyu is the murderer . uses his eye contact method on the suspect , but realizes he can not draw any conclusions unlike before . Seo attempts to shoot the suspect , but stops him and lets - go . In the end , the crimes remain unsolved . While visiting the crime scene years later in 2003 , - , now a businessman , learns from a little girl that the scene had recently been visited by another , unknown , man with a ' normal ' face . The little girl had asked the man why he was looking at the ditch and was told that he was reminiscing about something he had done there a long time ago . The film ends as , realizing this , looks straight at the camera , seemingly using his eye - contact method to spot the killer among the > 

 < synopsis > The film is divided into six segments . ( 1 ) " " : While being on a plane , a model and a music critic realise they have a common acquaintance called . Soon they discover that every passenger and crew member on board know . Is this coincidence ? ( 2 ) " The Rats " : A waitress recognizes her client - it 's the loan shark who caused a tragedy in her family . The cook suggests mixing rat poison with his food , but the waitress refuses . The stubborn cook , however , decides to proceed with her plan . ( 3 ) " The Strongest " : Two drivers on a lone highway have an argument with tragic consequences . ( 4 ) " " : A demolition engineer has his car towed by a truck for parking in a wrong place and he has an argument with the employee of the towing company . This event destroys his private and professional life , and he plots revenge against the corrupt towing company and the city hall . ( 5 ) " The Proposal " : A reckless son of a wealthy family has an overnight hit - and - run accident , in which a pregnant woman gets killed . He wakes his parents up and his father calls the lawyer . The parents propose to pay the groundkeeper to take the blame for the boy . Soon the father discovers that he is a victim of extortion of his lawyer and the public prosecutor in charge of the investigation . What will be his decision ? ( 6 ) " Until Death Do Us Apart " : During the wedding party , the bride discovers that her newlywed husband has been cheating on her with one of the guests , and she decides to pay him back.Claudio , , > 

 < synopsis > The governor of an unnamed western state , " " ( ) , has to pick a replacement for recently deceased . His corrupt political boss , ( ) , pressures to choose his handpicked stooge , while popular committees want a reformer . The governor 's children want him to select ( ) , the head of the . Unable to make up his mind between 's stooge and the reformer , decides to flip a coin . When it lands on edge and next to a newspaper story on one of 's accomplishments he chooses , calculating that his wholesome image will please the people while his navet will make him easy to manipulate . is taken under the wing of the publicly esteemed , but secretly crooked , ( ) , who was 's late father 's oldest and best friend , and he develops an immediate attraction to the senator 's daughter , ( ) . The unforgiving press quickly labels a bumpkin , with no business being a senator . , to keep busy , suggests he propose a bill . comes up with legislation that would authorize a federal government loan to buy some land in his home state for a national boys ' camp , to be paid back by youngsters across . Donations pour in immediately . However , the proposed campsite is already part of a dam - building graft scheme included in a bill framed by the political machine and supported by . Unwilling to crucify the worshipful so that their graft plan will go through , tells he wants out , but reminds him that is in power primarily through 's influence . Through , the machine accuses of trying to profit from his bill by producing fraudulent evidence that owns the land in question . is too shocked by 's betrayal to defend himself , and runs away . However , 's chief of staff , ( ) , has come to believe in him , and talks him into launching a filibuster to postpone the bill and prove his innocence on the floor just before the vote to expel him . While talks non - stop , his constituents try to rally around him , but the entrenched opposition is too powerful , and all attempts are crushed . Due to influence of the " machine " , on his orders , newspapers and radio stations in 's home state refuse to report what has to say and even twist the facts against the . An effort by the to spread the news results in vicious attacks on the children by 's minions . Although all hope seems lost , the senators begin to pay attention as approaches utter exhaustion . has one last card up his sleeve : he brings in bins of letters and telegrams from 's home state from people demanding his expulsion . Nearly broken by the news , finds a small ray of hope in a friendly smile from the of the ( ) . vows to press on until people believe him , but immediately collapses in a faint . Overcome with guilt , leaves the chamber and attempts to kill himself with a gun . When he is stopped , he bursts back into the chamber , loudly confesses to the whole scheme , and affirms 's innocence.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) explains in a voice - over that he was once a cop and road warrior and is now trekking through post - apocalyptic , running from haunting thoughts of his dead wife and child and other people he 's failed to save . As he stands on a ridge looking around , a two - headed lizard crawls near and he stomps on it before eating it . He drives off and is quickly pursued by a group of scavengers called the , all pale and covered in blisters due to radiation sickness . They chase through the desert and force him to crash before they capture him . The take to their lair in the , a system of caves in a very tall mesa . They shave his head and face . They tattoo his back with a notice saying he is a universal blood donor ( type O negative ) , intending to use him as a blood supply . They cover the lower part of his face with a trident - shaped iron muzzle and nearly brand him with an image of a skull engulfed in fire but he breaks free and runs from the . The chase through the caves shows that the is extensive and has an ample water supply as well as greenhouses . As he runs , continues to see images of the dead before he makes it to an exit high above the ground . He jumps out and latches onto a swinging hook , but he keeps swinging back toward the and they manage to pull him back into the tunnel . In the , there is a large community of survivors lorded over by the leader of the , ( - , who also played the villain in the original ( 1979 ) film ) . wears a grotesque face mask made of horse teeth set in a large pair of jaws , with air hoses attached to a bellows system on his back to help him breathe ( presumably , his lungs are damaged ) . As he addresses a crowd on the ground below the , he supplies the people with some water , making everyone go crazy and fight for it once shuts it off after a few seconds . He warns the people not to become addicted to water so that they do not go mad over its absence . then sends his commander ( ) out in a huge war rig to collect fuel from , with an escort of in smaller vehicles . has a metal prosthesis in place of her lower left arm and hand . On the road , diverts from the path to ( glimpsed as a distant group of oil refineries ) and heads . is alerted to the change and runs to the locked chambers where he keeps his five wives ( young women chosen to breed his children ) . They 're all gone , and writing on the walls says " Our children will not be warlords " and " Who killed the world ? " An old woman tells that he can not own a human . is taking the women away from , prompting him to rally the and go after her . All the are eager to join the chase , but one called ( ) is so weak that he needs a " blood bank " -- which means goes along for the ride , chained to and connected to the driver via a central line transfusion tube . The believe that can deliver them to the gates of , so is willing to risk death in service to his leader . The ride after 's war rig , which is attacked by another scavenging tribe , the . Nux straps to the hood of his car like the figurehead on a ship and eagerly chases alongside the others . They attempt to get close to the rig , but shakes most of them off , the aiding in the battle with explosive - tipped spears . gets close to the rig as attempts to break free . drives toward a enormous oncoming sand storm . Nux continues to chase her , even as they head into treacherous sand tornadoes . A few are killed in the storm , while plots a kamikaze run by spilling his fuel inside his car . He plans to set it ablaze with a flare when is able to overpower and stop him . The two crash in the storm . Max awakens to find himself still chained to an unconscious Nux and still wearing his muzzle . He grabs a shotgun and tries to shoot off 's wrist , but the gun misfires . He spots 's rig and walks there , finding five beautiful women -- the ( - ) , the ( ) , Capable ( ) , the ( ) , and the ( ) -- cleaning themselves with a hose and removing their chastity belts with bolt cutters . is nine months pregnant with 's child , and is also carrying his baby . points the shotgun at the women and demands the hose . He drinks , then tells them to use the cutters to cut off his chain . tries to but can not break it . sees in the distance that has gathered reinforcements from the other towns that supply gas and ammunition to the . The approaching forces are led by the ( ) and the ( ) . and fight as he tries to cut the chain that ties him to . Nux wakes up and helps fight , who is assisted by the other women . Nux cuts the chain and tries to take the rig for himself . However , it stalls because installed a kill switch and only she knows how to start it again . lets her back on the rig but he does n't want to take the rest of the women . insists that they come along , as she is guiding them to a location she calls the . When explains that 's " gratitude " toward will probably be a slow , painful death , gives in and as they ride off in the war rig , sneaks on board . He disconnects the brake line to the fuel pod , slowing the rig down . crawls out on the tanker and reconnects the line . During this leg of the chase , is able to remove his face mask with a file given to him by . drives the rig into a canyon where she has an arrangement with a group of biker bandits : they 'll close the pass behind her with a rock slide to foil her pursuers in exchange for the 3000 gallons of fuel in the trailer pod . She teaches the sequence of switches to throw to defeat the kill switch , then asks his name . He does n't want to tell her , so she says " When I yell ' Fool ' , drive out of here fast . " They spot and his forces closing in . gets out and shouts to the bikers that she 's brought the 3000 gallons of fuel , as agreed , and she 'll detach the pod . One of the bikers complains that she said there would be a few pursuers , but there are three large parties . , dodging to put the rig between herself and the bikers , yells " Fool ! " and manages , between bullets , to climb back on as drives the rig away . Though she never did detach the fuel trailer , the the bikers blow up the overpass , temporarily halting 's pursuit . As they race away , and fight off the biker bandits with their respective talents for marksmanship . , in his large - wheeled , off - road vehicle , is able to climb over the rockfall . He 's joined by , who proves that is on 's rig with a scrap of cloth he 'd taken from her . Another chase ensues through the desert . The keep trying to overtake the rig while catches up . He attempts to shoot at the rig until steps out as a human shield , and can not do a thing without hurting his potential son . Nux attempts to help , who sprays chrome paint on 's mouth with the promise of bringing him to the gates of if succeeds . Almost immediately , loses his gun in front of , who continues driving with disappointment . tries climbing back to the front of the rig , but she falls off and is run over by 's car . The women tell to turn back , but when he tells that went under the wheels , says they must keep going . The others cry for . Behind them , screams in rage while holding 's body . Nux slips back into the rig with the promise of helping the women evade . He lies on the floor , distraught that he has failed yet again and has lost his chance of joining his personal army . Capable consoles him . At the front , tells of the and how she was taken from it as a child . As they continue driving through the night , the rig becomes stuck in a large field of mud . The is not far behind them . Max shoots at him but misses , and then gets a clean shot , taking out the 's lights and blinding him . suggests they attach the truck 's winch cable to a nearby tree and pull the rig forward . Meanwhile , 's lieutenant the ( ) takes 's body , as she is near death , and he cuts the baby out of her abdomen . The baby is dead too , but he tells that it was a boy . tells his adult son ( ) that he had a brother . screams proudly . The women continue trying to push the rig out of the mud while goes out to face the himself . A few bright flashes of explosions are seen in the distant fog and he returns shortly with the 's blood on his face , along with a nice supply of guns and ammo . In the morning , the rig comes up to a tower where a naked woman , the ( ) , is screaming for help . thinks it 's a trap , but steps out and tells the her mother 's name and her affiliation with this clan . The climbs down the tower and puts on a robe . More older women , the , emerge . The eldest , of the ( ) , recognizes . tells them that she is taking the women from the to the , but of the informs her that the muddy swamp they passed through was the , and has long since become uninhabitable . walks into the sand and falls on her knees , screaming in despair . The agree to help the women from the ride across the salt flats ( the dried up ocean ) in search of a home . , still haunted by the images of his wife and child , decides to help the women go back to the since 's greenery and water supply are currently unguarded . They also plan to trap and his army in the canyons . The group rides back in the direction of the . sees them with his telescope , knowing full - well what their plan is . He gathers his army and gives chase . The help fight back . The shoots at the while defending one of her own until she is run over . and kill some of the , while gets to kill the by using him as a human shield . of the is also killed when one of the cuts her neck . Toast is captured by and held hostage . is stabbed on 's vehicle and grows weaker as and gain momentum . Toast distracts long enough to give an opportunity to hook 's mask onto the wheels of his car . She growls , " Remember me ? " to him as the wheels rip the mask and part of 's face off , killing him . The rig then heads toward the canyon , with still trying to stop them . The women get off safely while says goodbye to Capable and swerves against the canyon , sacrificing himself to kill and collapse the overpass to put an end to 's army . On the way back to the , 's lungs nearly collapse . punches a small hole in her side to give her air . She starts to lose consciousness , and gives her a transfusion of his own blood . He finally tells her his name as she closes her eyes . The group arrives at the . presents the people with 's mouthless corpse , making everyone cheer . They rip 's corpse apart and feed off him . The water supply is brought out , giving the people as much water as they need . rises and apparently becomes the new leader . She and acknowledge each other with respect once more before he slips away into the crowd to continue down his own > 

 < synopsis > A narrator ( ) introduces us to ( ) , a charming and personable 8 year - old girl living in , , . She resides in a quaint house with her mother , ( ) , a dissheveled kleptomaniac who is addicted to and includes it in nearly all of her dastardly cooking , and her father , , who spends much of his time locked away in an outdoor shed drinking and performing taxidermy on birds that he 's found dead on the freeway . At school , is often made fun of for an unfortunate birthmark on her forehead . With no friends besides her pet rooster , , and the lack of support from her parents , finds solace in food , including condensed milk , and her favorite television show , the . She creates her own toys and fantasizes about one day marrying a man named , after her favorite tea , and living in a castle in . ( ) is a 44 year - old , morbidly obese man living in in a small apartment . He also enjoys watching the but suffers from social anxieties and has no friends besides his goldfish , who has sadly just passed away . decides to quickly buy another fish and name him before indulging in another chocolate hotdog to help him sleep . One day , while accompanying her mother as she ' borrows ' envelopes from the local post office , decides to write a letter to someone in , after wondering what the country was like . She happens upon the name ' ' from the directory just as is caught stuffing envelopes up her dress . grabs the address from the book as her mother grabs her and flees the post office . At home , writes her introductory letter to and includes in her package a drawing of herself and a chocolate bar as a token of friendship . Meanwhile , has just arrived home from his weekly meeting particularly disturbed due to unwanted flirtations from a woman in his class . does n't understand most social cues and finds people perplexing and complicated . Upon finding and reading 's letter , becomes even more unsettled and resorts to swaying in a corner , something he does to calm himself in the face of a stressful event . However , after calming himself , sits down to his typewriter and begins writing out a reply to . He answers all of her questions to the best of his ability while describing his life . Besides his fish , shares the apartment with a few snails , a parakeet , a one - eyed cat , and an imaginary friend named who spends his time reading in the corner since 's psychiatrist informed that he did n't need him anymore . writes that he was born Jewish but has since become an atheist , although he still wears his yarmulke since it keeps his head warm . He sends out his letter and encloses some photos and the recipe to his chocolate hotdogs . The letter arrives on 's doorstep a few days later , only to be picked up and read by , who is not impressed by whom she thinks is a nutcase writing to her daughter . She promptly throws the letter in the trash . The next morning before school , helps bring the trash out to the curb and , when it is accidentally knocked over , discovers the crumpled letter from . She hides it from her mother and reads it in private later on , savoring every word . She writes back and informs to mail his letters to her elderly neighbor so that her parents do n't discover them . is a veteran who lost his legs while being dangled over a school of pirahna as a prisoner of war . Since then , he 's been confined to a wheelchair and suffers from , so delivers his mail for him . In her letter , describes how she is teased at school and asks for any advice and if he 's ever been teased . This question is unsettling to to a severe degree since it brings supressed memories to the surface of when he was bullied as a child . After calming down , he writes a reply and attaches the pompom made to the top of his yarmulke . He suggests that tell her teasers that her birthmark is actually made of chocolate , which means that she will be in charge of all of it when she gets to . 's reply , which includes a happy conclusion to her bullying and a proclamation of love for her Greek neighbor ( ) leaves with an anxiety attack that renders him emotionally and psychologically numb . He is institutionalized for 8 months and given advanced treatment ( electric shock therapy ) while waits and wonders what 's become of him . Eventually , she falls into a depression , as is diagnosed with his own , and tries to erase all evidence of their friendship . and continue on with their lives for some time , each trying to cope with their troubles . While pouts in self - loathing , finds himself facing manslaughter charges when his air conditioning unit falls out of his window and crushes a mime . However , due to his mental deficiencies , he is pardoned . Shortly after , is astonished to see that he 's won the lottery and puts his newfound wealth to good use . He buys the entire collection of action figures and a lifetime supply of chocolate . He gives the rest of his wealth to his elderly and nearly blind neighbor , , who indulges in every personal luxury before passing away and willing her fortune to a local cat shelter whose owner pockets every cent . Despite his wealth in chocolate and , feels unfulfilled until he figures out that his friendship with , while unsettling , was incomparable and , with the encouragement of his psychiatrist , writes another letter . He apologizes for his absence and explains that he was recently diagnosed with 's . He lists the various traits along with a lamentation for being unable to cry properly . Elated to have finally received another letter , responds and encloses a vial of her own tears as a gift to . Over the years they continue to write and learns to deal with the slightest hint of anxiety that 's letters might encourage . However , while 's world continues as normal , if not in an improving manner , 's life bec0o11111111mes more complicated . First comes the passing of her father who is swept away by a rogue wave while metal detecting on a beach , this coming shortly after he quit his job at the tea factory . is left a sum of money and uses it to go to university to study mental disorders . Over time , she tries to gain the romantic attention of her neighbor , to no avail and often with embarassing consequences , leaving her to sob alone in her room . Her failed attempts at romance leave her to lament that she wasted her savings to have her birthmark surgically removed and resigns herself to the fact that love is not for her . Meanwhile , , after suffering prolonged grief and remorse for her husband , accidentally swallows a bottle of formaldehyde , mistaking it for her sherry . Still , this tragedy encouarages to comfort and the two soon fall in love and are married . ( ) writes that her life is now perfect with , who has a pen - pal of his own in . Her self esteem is blossoming and her studies at have culminated into a goal to cure the world of mental illness . She writes her thesis on 's and uses as a case study , eventually writing her own book on the disability . She sends her first copy to but , upon seeing it , he is flung into an uncontrollable rage . He never thought he had a ' disability ' and finds the matter surrounding his difference offensive . Unable to put his thoughts coherently to paper , sends his ' M ' key to just as she is about to visit him in . His silent but powerful message sends into a deep depression and she takes all of her book copies to an industrial shredder and destroys them . She finds solace in two - minute noodles and sherry and wallows in her self loathing until one day she suddenly notices that has left her , explaining in a letter that he 's fallen in love with his pen - friend and has gone to live with him on his sheep farm . Meanwhile , has since overcome his anger and decides to write back . He sends her his entire collection of Noblet figures as a sign that he 's forgiven her and , as he counts the stars after sending his package , suddenly feels complete . As the package arrives on 's doorstep , prepares to hang herself , unaware that she is pregnant . Her neighbor , , notices her package on the doorstep and , with a burst of confidence and purpose , wheels himself outside and across the street to ring the doorbell . The sound catches off guard and she takes the noose off her neck to answer the door , finding a gleeful and her package . Len returns to his home triumphant as finds 's letter and his Noblet collection . Some time later , and with her new baby , travels to and climbs the stairs of 's apartment building . She finds his apartment and opens the unlocked door . Within , she finds the Noblets playing on the tv and leaning back on his sofa , having passed away peacefully that morning . As she sits beside him , follows his gaze upward and is astonished to see that has pasted her letters all over the ceiling . She cradles her baby as she notes to herself that smells of licorice and old books while tears roll down her cheeks.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > A and his squire are home from the crusades . is sweeping their country . As they approach home , appears to the knight and tells him it is his time . The knight challenges Death to a chess game for his life . The and play as the cultural turmoil envelopes the people around them as they try , in different ways , to deal with the upheaval the plague has & > 

 < synopsis > A Viking boy called ( voice : ) introduces his village of ( " it 's been here for seven generations , but every single building is new " ) . The village is attacked by dragons , who steal food ( mostly sheep ) and set things on fire ( hence all the new buildings ) . The villagers grab weapons and try to fight the dragons off . Despite being told by every adult in sight to go indoors , hauls out a bolas - shooting cannon he made himself and shoots a dragon out of the night sky . ( As assistant to the village , ( voice : ) , has access to tools and materials and knows how to use them . ) The dragon lands in the woods some distance form the village and no one believes that he hit anything , so it 's the next day before can go looking for it . It turns out to be a rare and deadly , but ca n't make himself kill it . Instead he releases it -- whereupon it also refrains from killing -- and it flies off through the trees . Hiccup discovers that the dragon ( which he eventually calls because of its retractable teeth ) has holed up in a steep - sided valley because it can no longer fly more than a few feet at a time . While sketching the dragon , realizes that it 's missing a tail fin . He makes a prosthetic tail fin out of leather . The new fin helps , but ca n't control it and inadvertently takes for a ride , giving him a clear idea of what 's needed to help the dragon fly right . In a series of workshop and test flight scenes , builds and perfects a saddle , a control mechanism for the tail fin , and a safety harness . Meanwhile , 's father ( voice : ) has signed him up for dragon training with , which is very different from the training he 's already doing with : he 's going to learn to fight dragons . At first , he 's the worst student in the class . Since has always been an accident - prone klutz , this comes as no surprise to his classmates ( voice : ) , ( voice : ) , ( voice : - ) , ( voice : ) , and her twin brother ( voice : ) . ( 's a little sweet on . ) Before long , is able to use some things he 's learned while working with to and manage the school 's practice dragons . ( It turns out dragons are just big kitty - cats : they like to be petted , there 's a kind of grass that 's like cat - nip to them , and they love fish ( but hate eels ) . ) When returns from a failed search for the fabled nest of the dragons , he 's surprised but thrilled to hear that his son is doing brilliantly at dragon training . He gives a horned helmet made from one of his dead mother 's breastplates . But , as usual , is unable to get around his father 's expectations and speak frankly , so he ca n't explain that his success at school is unlikely to lead to the slaying of any dragons . When subdues a practice dragon , unintentionally earning the privilege of killing it before the entire village , he 's horrified and decides to flee with . However , having noticed 's frequent disappearances and secretive behavior , is suspicious . She follows him to the hidden valley and sees . Unable to explain his relationship with the dragon , takes her flying , and she 's captivated . But they get caught up in a flock of dragons returning to their nest carrying food . The dragons fly inside a mountainous island and drop the food into a pit , which turns out to contain a huge , terrifying , and very hungry dragon that eats the smaller ones if they do n't bring it enough food . Hiccup and and shocked to realize that the dragons have been stealing their sheep to keep from being eaten themselves . When they get home , convinces not to reveal the location of the dragon nest . Before she goes , she punches him in the arm and says " That 's for kidnapping me . " Then she kisses him and says " That 's for everything else . "Everything goes wrong at the dragon - killing ceremony . Hiccup discards his weapons in an attempt to show the that dragons only fight to defend themselves , but and others intervene and the dragon attacks . comes to the rescue and is on the verge of killing when calls off . Despite 's protests , the angry chain up . When he ineptly tries to explain , lets it slip that took him to the nest of the dragons , and resolves to use to find the nest again . He wo n't listen to 's warnings about the giant dragon . He loads on his ship and the Viking fleet sails off with all the warriors in the village , disowning and leaving him behind . When wonders aloud why he did n't kill when he had the chance since it would have avoided all of this , challenges him to explain why . In doing so , comes to an epiphany about his moral character , his personal strength and 's faith in him . Inspired , and his classmates mount the practice dragons and fly off in pursuit of the fleet . At the dragons ' island , the use catapults to break open the side of the mountain in which the giant dragon is trapped . When it comes out , realizes that he 's made a mistake . He resolves to fight it himself to buy the other time to escape ; volunteers to join him . While and prepare to sacrifice themselves to distract the dragon , the kids arrive to join the battle . They do manage to distract the giant dragon a little , but it sets the ' ships on fire . While his comrades keep the giant dragon occupied , tries to rescue ( who 's still in chains ) from the burning ship , but they end up under water and rescues both of them . Then and go after the giant dragon together . They draw it up into the clouds and away from the , trying to get it to crash on the island . In the end releases a blast into the giant dragon 's open mouth and it crashes and burns , apparently taking our heroes down with it -- we see fall toward the fire as tries desperately to catch him . On the ground , a heartbroken approaches the wounded wondering what has become of his son ; opens his wings to show that he saved . ( " Well , most of him , " remarks cryptically.)Back at home , wakes up and urges him out of bed . Hiccup finds that he lost his left foot in the battle with the giant dragon . However , has made him a new one , ingeniously spring - loaded . ( and now have matching disabilities . ) They go out into the village , which is full of swooping , frolicking dragons ; the now treat them as pets . Astrid greets with a kiss . Supplied by with a new tail fin prosthetic and saddle for , takes flight with and his friends as he exults at the new alliance of and Dragons.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The film begins with a young boy with really long hair named ( ) telling us how he came into the possession of his mother , who we only know as ( ) via TV people in outer space and him falling from . He wakes up and says hi to all the things in the tiny ramshackle room he shares with his mother : the chair , the cupboard , the inkblot on the carpet . is excited because today is his fifth birthday . His mom tells him they 're going to make him a birthday cake . They go throughout their normal day she leads him through yoga practice in their tiny bathroom . She gets him to exercise by telling him to touch this wall , no , I meant this wall . notes a bad toothache . At night , bakes the cake . Due to the limited resources , it ends up being very small and not impressive . asks why there are no candles with fire . She tells him they ca n't get them . He is upset and refuses to eat the cake , telling her she could have asked for candles from for their treat instead of jeans like last time . She says she gets things they need for treat . He says maybe he 'll ask for candles for when he turns six next week . She tells him he turns six next year . It gets late and goes into a tiny cupboard where he sleeps . comes in and we see him briefly from 's point of view , through the slats . asks about the cake and tells if he knew the boy had a birthday , he would have brought a present . 's small bed begins to squeak as they have sex off screen . merely counts higher and higher as this goes on . The next morning , finds his mom in bed . They go throughout their normal day . She cuts apple slices and her bad tooth comes out . She gives it to who keeps it in his mouth . He watches TV on a television and talks of the TV people , which he thinks of are some form of aliens . teaches , educating him on various subjects . He takes a bath . complains that his mom did n't tell that it was his birthday and that would have brought a present . tells him he was lying . She makes him dinner , which is just a piece of toast . He asks if he can have something else to eat but she does n't respond , irritated at her limited resources . The next morning , wakes up and sees a brand new remote control race car for him . He plays with it all around the tiny room , much to 's annoyance . With the whirl of the race car making noise , begins screaming up at the ceiling , which we see is lined with soundproof material . There are no windows in the room but only one skylight showing the blue sky above . begins telling his mom about his pet dog , , and how he ca n't wait to be reunited with him . His mom tells him he invented in his head and that they have no dog . sees a mouse in the kitchen and tries to befriend it but scares him away . is upset but explains that the mouse could eat their food or bite them when they sleep . He tells her she did n't have to kill it and she says she did n't it went to the backyard with his family . does n't know what she means . That night , is making cheese sandwiches . asks what smells funny and she realizes she left the toaster oven on and it has caught fire . She is worried about this . She sends to bed . He wonders , when he dreams , where he goes . She tells him he is always there , in that room . A padlock code is punched and stays silent in his cupboard . comes in with groceries . He asks about the smell and she tells him she burned the sandwiches she was making and she was n't thinking . He tells her thinking was never one of her strong points . When she asks him about something missing from the bags , gets violently angry with her and says its hard to have to provide for the both of them . He tells her he was laid off six months ago and asks if she knows how hard it is to buy things without an income . She asks if he 's been looking for a job and he gets angry with her . In the cupboard , stirs , watching the argument . notices and asks if he 's really asleep in there . He tries to prove he is awake by telling to come out because he has candy but before can take the bait , lures to the bed . Later that night , sneaks out of his cupboard and tiptoes over to 's bed . is still asleep next to her . peers over to look at , who then opens his eyes . He lunges for but wakes up and throws herself on top of . He clobbers her , allowing to escape . storms off and begins sobbing , telling his mom he knows he is not supposed to leave the cupboard and he will never do it again . The next morning , wakes up in 's bed and notices he can see his breath . When wakes up , he points this out to her , telling his mom he 's a1 dragon . realizes has cut the power . They are in the dark and the heater is off so they are freezing . They bundle up in blankets . sits down and asks if he wants to know where the mouse went after he left the room . She tries to explain the mouse is outside , on the other side of the wall . asks if she means outer space with the TV people . She says , no , that was n't true . He was younger and so she made up a story that he 'd understand but now he is five and should know the truth . She tries again , telling him there are two sides to everything . He says , Not an octagon . That has eight sides . She said but every wall has another side and on the other side are buildings and people and trees and a house with a hammock that she used to live in . That when she was 17 , a man told her he had a sick dog to lure him into his custody . interrupts , asking about the dog . She screams there was no dog . She tries to explain that there is a world outside the room that he 's lived in his whole life but can not conceptualize this as he has never seen anything beyond that room . She explains that the TV people are images of real people . He asks if ( the ) is real and she says , no , she is a cartoon . But people are real and they 're all outside . He calls her a liar . She tells him the things she said before were a lie and now she s trying to tell an un - lie . He says he wishes he were four again . He suggests she tells him these things when he 's six instead of five . After some time , the power is turned back on . A leaf falls on the skylight and points this out . does n't believe it because leaves on TV are green but she sees they are green on trees but turn brown when they fall off and rot . tells she has a plan to get him out . She boils water on the stove and says she 's going to convince that he is sick . He will take him to a place called a hospital where there are people around . is going to give a note to anybody he sees in the hospital and tell them his mommy 's name ( since she was sure to have been a high profile kidnap victim ) . is nervous because he 's never seen a real person before and does n't quite know what to expect . He asks why they do n't just hurt and then escape . said she tried once , years ago she took the toilet lid off and when he came inside , she tried to smash it over his head . But he caught her and hurt her wrist and that 's why its been in bad shape his whole life . Its about time for to come in so she pours the hot water on his face , which makes him scream but she tries to assuage him , telling him he must pretend to be sick and act floppy . She then forces herself to vomit and spreads it around 's pillow , which freaks him out . When comes in , pretends to be hysterical , explaining that got sick when the power was turned off and they were left in the cold . notes that is burning up and says he 'll get some antibiotics the next day . But insists he takes to an emergency room because it is urgent . He refuses . The next day , says she has a new plan . will pretend to be dead instead of floppy , he 'll be stiff like a robot . She will roll him up in a rug and will put in the back of a truck . He will feel movement and unroll himself in the rug . There will be a long stop and that 's when has to jump out and run to the first person he sees , asking for help . She rolls him in the rug but too tightly so he ca n't unravel himself . She tries it again where he is more loosely wrapped and he is able to get himself out . watches some TV and is now able to discern that the people he sees are real people being filmed although the cartoons are , in fact , not real . He is finally beginning to understand . They are discussing the plan with her repeating over and over that he will unravel , jump out when the truck stops , and then find help . She tells him to picture his moms voice giving him guidance even though they 'll be apart . When he asks her if she will join him in the outside world , she agrees but it is obvious she does n't believe she will survive once realizes she has tricked him into letting escape . Just then , they hear the padlock and has to be quick to roll up into the rug . She finishes just as enters , telling her he has the antibiotics , but begins crying , saying that he killed when he turned the power off . She begs him to give a proper burial in the woods , some place with trees . agrees and picks up in the rolled up rug . The rug is loaded into the back of 's pickup truck , just as they planned . He drives off to bury in the woods . From inside the rug , feels the truck slow to a stop . He begins to unravel and is successful at releasing himself from the rug . rolls through two stop signs , then proceeds over railroad tracks . decides then to stand up and jump out , looking for a person . sees this happening in his mirror , says Stupid bitch in regards to 's tricking him , and stops the car . Simultaneously , begins running towards a real person with a dog . But grabs him and violently tries to return him to the vehicle . is too scared to talk to the person but tries handing him the note as he is dragged away . The man is suspicious and tells him to leave the girl alone ( he mistakes as a girl because of his long hair ) and that he is going to call the police . abandons and speeds off in the truck . is now left alone with the man . has passed and is greeted by a friendly police officer and her cranky partner . He is put into the back of the car and asked questions . The lady 's partner theorizes the boy has probably escaped from some cult but the female officer is more patient with . He shows her 's bad tooth that he keeps in his mouth and finally begins to talk . She asks what his mom 's name is but he ca n't remember . She asks him where he lives but he tells her a room . She asks if the room has any windows and he says ' no ' . She asks how they get light and he tells her there 's a skylight . He remembers that it is called a shed . He explains that he was supposed to jump out when the truck stopped but it stopped two times and then went sideways . She tells her partner to put out a radio call to officers to look for sheds with a skylight in the backyards of houses three blocks from the railroad stop . She says a red pickup truck should be in the driveway . Time passes and the police car shows up in front of the house that we 've seen when loaded the rug into his truck . The officers leave alone in the car and he ca n't open the door because it is a police car . Then suddenly comes running around the corner , followed by officers . She rushes towards the car with inside . She ca n't get in and ca n't get out and she bangs on the glass . The next scene , wakes up in a hospital room , which by his reckoning feels enormous with large windows overlooking a grander world he 's been isolated from all this time . wakes up and he tells her he wet the bed and he is sorry . She 's not upset with him . She throws away his underwear and tells him they 'll get more . They have a lot of food and he asks if it is for their treat and she tells him they 're going to have lots of treats and not just on . He wants to take a bath but she tells them they have a shower stall . They shower and play and he admires the view of the city . He is overwhelmed at seeing more of the world than the room for the first time . and are treated and given many tests to take . The doctor comes in and suggests wear a mask and sunscreen before he goes out since he has n't built up immunity to the environment , but overall he 's still young enough to likely develop normally . Regardless , also has to endure being given vaccinations for the first time to acclimate him properly . It is mentioned that will have surgery on her wrist that damaged after she tried to harm him . tells that his grandma and grandpa are going to meet them . Grandpa now lives several hours away but he has flown in . The two ( and ) burst in the door , tired of waiting to be admitted , and embrace their long - lost kidnapped daughter . and are taken to her childhood home where 's mother now lives with her new husband . The media is camped outside the house but the family ignores them . wants to know where the hammock is that always talked about but she is n't sure ; it must have been removed in the last seven years . is told that his grandma 's new husband has a dog but he keeps him in the country . Inside , there are tons of toys for , which explains are from all the people who care about him . He wants to know who these people are . 's grandmother asks if he wants to cut his hair but he whispers his response to that his strength is in his hair . notices her room is exactly as she left it . She goes through her old yearbook and shows an old picture of her from high school with members of her track team , on which she ran anchor . She asks if he knows what happened to the other girls and said he does n't and she said , " that 's right because nothing happened to them . "At , is given ice cream and experiences his first brain freeze . 's mom and try to make conversation but gets violently angry with her own father , demanding that he looks at his grandson but he ca n't because he is too uncomfortable ( i.e. , because is the product of his daughter being raped by her abductor ) . She finally takes upstairs . and have a hard time settling into life outside their captivity . asks when they are going to leave but she tells him they live there now . He is still wary of people and constantly hides in small spaces . 's stepdad is very friendly to him , which makes him a little more comfortable . The family 's lawyer comes and tells them that there is going to be a trial and they will need money and the easiest way to get some is to do a prime time interview . A broadcast journalist shows up at the house . is made up by the crew and prompted that if she feels uncomfortable with any questions , she can simply request they move on . The interview begins and the journalist tells it must have been hard to maintain her faith in after all those years in captivity and asks if she ever considered taking her own life . This derails who does n't answer . The journalist then asks what will tell her son when he asks about his father one day . responds that was not her father to which the journalist inquires if there were other men . explains , no , but he is not 's parent she is his only parent . The journalist does n't acknowledge this response and instead says that he is his father , biologically speaking . She asks another invasive line of questioning : why did n't she have her captor take away when he was born ? The journalist suggests could have been dropped off at a hospital and been able to live a normal life . She then suggests only kept imprisoned out of a selfish desire to not be alone . The interview has upset and she sinks into a depression . She is aggressive with and tries to force him to play with the toys he 's been given by the sympathetic masses . is n't interested so she forces him to play with Legos . Mas mother tries to defend but explodes on her mother , saying she seems to have been able to continue on with her life just fine in 's absence . 's mother encourages her to be nice but she said her mom 's voice telling her to be nice is what ran through her head when a man approached her about a sick dog . Later , hears some noises coming from the bathroom . He enters to find his mom unconscious on the floor . She has swallowed pills in a suicide attempt . is taken away . is left alone with just his grandma and her boyfriend . But he begins to get more acclimated with the world and feel more comfortable in their home . His grandma 's husband even brings his dog home , which excites , who still remembers his ( imaginary ) dog , . calls from the hospital . He does n't know how to use a telephone but they have a short conversation . tells that he wants her to cut his hair ( which has never been cut in his whole life ) . She asks if he 's sure and he says it is his strength but now he wants to send it to his mom so it can be her strength . His grandma tells him she used to cut his mom 's hair and then cuts off his ponytail in a few snips which he is worried about , expecting it to hurt . She tells him she has wanted to cut his hair for a long time . He tells her , I love you , . goes by and a neighbor spies through the window . goes into the backyard and begins to play with him . It is revealed that is watching from inside . She greets and tells him that when he sent his hair , it made her happy and gave her a reason to come home . and play together , their camaraderie from early in the film returning . asks if they are ever going to return to the room . She is taken aback by this and he tells her he means just for a visit . and return to the shed which now has the front door blasted off ( how was initially rescued ) . It looks completely different from his new perspective so asks if its been shrunk . All of the furniture is gone which explains is because the police took it for evidence to prove that they were there . tells her its different with the door open . asks him if she wants him to shut the door but he says , no . Just like when he said hello to everything in the room , now says " , # 1 . , # 2 . , . " He then tells to say goodbye to . Privately , mouths " , . and walk away from the shed with police escorts in the distance , who have given the two the opportunity to say goodbye to their prison for their years of > 

 < synopsis > The city of in a world entirely populated by monsters is powered by energy from the screams of human children . At the , , factory , skilled monsters employed as " scarers " venture into the human world to scare children and harvest their screams , through doors that activate portals to children 's bedroom closets . The factory has a huge warehouse containing thousands of doors , work areas called " scare floors " where the doors are activated and the energy from the screams of human children are contained in energy containers , and a simulator room in which employees practice their scare skills in a simulator . Work at the factory is considered dangerous , as human children are believed to be toxic . The story takes place in , a city populated entirely by monsters . is not part of the human world , but it can be connected to children 's bedrooms through their closet doors . When a door is properly activated , it becomes a portal between the monster world and the human world . The city 's power supply is provided by , , a utility company that employs monsters to scare children and extract energy from their screams . The company has a huge warehouse full of doors , work areas called " scare floors " where the doors are activated , and a special training room in which employees practice their scare skills . The company 's best scarer is " Sully " ( ) , whose assistant is his best friend , " " ( ) . 's main rival is ( ) , and the company 's CEO is ( ) . is in the middle of an energy crisis because children are harder to scare than they used to be . One day , Sully finds an activated door on his scare floor after the workday has ended . He finds no one in the room behind the door , but a little two - year - old girl ( ) follows him back into the monster world . Far from being scared , she calls him " " and delights in playing with him . Since monsters believe humans are lethally toxic , Sully tries repeatedly to return the girl to her room , but she keeps following him back , and eventually deactivates and stores the door , leaving the girl stuck in the monster world . The girl 's presence becomes public knowledge after Sully sneaks her into a restaurant to find , so they hide her in 's home while the ( ) searches for her . Sully eventually names the girl " " , and he slowly bonds with her after realizing that she is not poisonous . He also discovers that her laughter produces even more energy than her screams . The next morning , Sully and disguise in a monster costume and sneak her into work . agrees to help them return her to her bedroom , but when enters the room , captures him in a box , believing he is . intends to kidnap and subject her to a device that extracts her screams . What follows is a sequence of battles , chases , and mishaps in which Sully and attempt to protect from and his scream machine . reveals that he is in cahoots with and banishes Sully and to the , where they meet the ( ) , but Sully and return to the monster world through a village at the foot of the mountain , where chases them through the company 's roller - coaster - like door - moving system . When the energy in 's laughter activates the doors in storage , the chase passes in and out of the human world . Finally , Sully and Boo defeat . Sully throws through the door of a trailer - park trailer , where a woman beats with a shovel , and destroys the door to make sure never comes back . Just as Sully and attempt to return to her home , and the call her door to the scare floor , ready to arrest them , but leads the agents away by fleeing with 's monster costume , and Sully escapes with and the door . When follows and , attempts to set up and activate the door , and when follows them through the door , he tells Sully he is willing to kidnap children in order to save the company . However , Sully had not properly activated 's door , causing the three to actually wind up in the adjacent , training room , which is equipped with a video monitoring system . has recorded 's confession , and after he replays the confession , agents arrest . With the scream - machine plot foiled , the agents call in their leader , who has been working undercover as ( ) , the company 's bookkeeper . says goodbye to and Sully returns her to her bedroom , then has the door shredded , preventing monsters from ever visiting again . Sully keeps one of the wood splinters as a memento . Some time later , Sully is the CEO of , , and the company has ended the energy crisis with his policy of making children laugh instead of scaring them . Meanwhile , has collected and reassembled the pieces of 's shredded door . When Sully puts his piece in its place , the door is activated again , and when he peeks into 's room , she greets him . The credits ( theatrical version ) or bonus features ( home video ) include a series of simulated outtakes and an amateur stage performance played by and other , employees.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > During an evening beach party on a coast , attractive blonde ( ) catches the eye of partygoer ( ) and leads him away from the group to go skinny - dipping in the ocean . , quite drunk , passes out on the sand before he can even undress , but , undeterred , strips down and dives into the surf . As swims further from the shoreline , she pauses to tread water . An unseen creature notices 's paddling legs from beneath the surface and begins to approach her . Chrissie is quickly attacked by the creature , which grabs hold of her leg and , after a violent struggle , drags her below the waves . Her screams for help go unheard , and eerie silence follows her submergence . The surrounding town of is preparing for the upcoming weekend , their most financially lucrative time of the year . The community depends on tourism as a major source of economic support and waits eagerly for each summer to arrive when herds of mainlanders come to savor 's shores . ( ) , 's chief of police , receives a call at home regarding ' disappearance . Following the report made by that she was last seen off the coast , goes to the beach with his deputy ( ) to search for clues . Hendricks soon stumbles upon the segmented remains of , washed up on the shore and being feasted upon by crabs . Back at the police station , receives a call from the coroner ( ) , who determines that was the victim of a shark attack . Fearing for the safety of 's many swimmers , immediately prepares to close the beaches until further investigations can be made . His intentions are quickly noticed by ( ) , who , fearing for the income loss that would result from closing the beach at such a pivotal point in the summer , attempts to convince that a shark attack is too hasty a conclusion , and pressures him and the coroner to change 's official cause of death to mutilation by boat propeller . remains dedicated to the safety of Amity 's citizens and tourists , regardless of the financial toll the town might endure . However , forbids him to close the beaches just yet . Over the next few days , ferryloads of tourists arrive on 's docks . The beaches are crowded each day , and is extremely concerned about more potential attacks . As and his wife ( ) sit in the sand , scans the shoreline for any sign of trouble . A ways down the beach , young ( ) asks his mother for permission to go swimming . Though ( ) notes that her son 's fingers are starting to " prune " from the time he has already spent in the water that day , she allows him ten more minutes . and his yellow raft enter the ocean one last time before being set upon by what is unmistakably an enormous shark . Amid the ensuing panic of the other beachgoers , , who had not seen the attack , calls out desperately for her son as the bloodied and shredded remains of his raft wash up in the surf . With dozens of witnesses to 's gruesome death , the presence of a shark in waters is undeniable and is finally permitted to close the beaches . 's grieving mother offers a $ 3000 reward to anyone who can catch the shark that killed her son , and a town meeting is held to discuss the official shark problem . Brody announces that the police department is expanding its efforts to keep the beaches safe , as well as bringing in a shark expert from the to assist them . Most of the assembled townspeople are more concerned with finances than safety , and remain angry about the beaches being closed , although assures them it will only be for 24 hours . The chatter is quelled by ( ) , an eccentric and roughened local fisherman who guarantees the capture and slaughter of the offending shark for the price of $ 10,000 . Though his offer is not accepted at that point , seems confident that the job will fall to him eventually . With 's reward made public , scores of amateur shark hunters crowd 's docks , coming from all over the . Two local men make a clumsy attempt to lure the shark with a pork roast , which results in one of them nearly becoming the shark 's third victim . Arriving at the same time as the of overconfident fishermen is ( ) , the shark expert from the hired by the police . After meeting with , is allowed to view the remains of , which are brought to him in an ominously small container . , visibly shaken after examining the mangled body parts , assures that did not die in a boating accident , but was attacked by a shark . The town breathes a sigh of relief when the corpse of a large tiger shark is displayed on the docks , having been caught by some of the contending fishermen . is initially elated , believing the nightmare to be over , until examines the creature 's mouth and determines that its bite radius does not match the wounds on ' remains , and therefore is likely not the shark they are seeking . , wanting to be certain , suggests that he examine the contents of the shark 's stomach , as its slow digestive system would ensure that any recent meals would still be inside . supports this plan , but seems disturbed by the notion and disapproves.\\nThe crowd falls silent as arrives , clad in black and choking back tears , presumably returning from her son 's funeral . She approaches and slaps him across the face , furiously accusing him of keeping the beaches open despite having prior knowledge that there was a man - eating shark in the water . , angry and ashamed , becomes all the more determined to prevent further attacks . While attempts to unwind at home with his wife and children , stops by to discuss the shark situation , underlining his earlier suspicion that the captured tiger shark is not the animal responsible for the deaths of and . He believes that the culprit is not a tiger shark , but a , and that unless it is stopped , it will likely remain in Amity 's waters until its food source is depleted . and decide to examine the shark 's stomach contents themselves , regardless of 's opinions . The men visit the deserted docks at night and locate the dead tiger shark . Hooper slices its belly open , only to find some bisected fish , several tin cans , and a license plate , leading him to theorize that the shark made it 's way up the Atlantic coast from the of . Finding no human remains , and confirm that this can not be the shark they are after . Hooper convinces to continue their investigation out on the water , though is terrified of the ocean . Using sonar equipment , locates a large object a good distance away from the shoreline . recognizes it as the boat of ( ) , a local fisherman . Hooper decides to investigate the half - submerged craft , despite 's protests , and dons his scuba gear before entering the water . discovers a large hole in the hull of the boat , and finds an enormous tooth embedded in the side . While examining the tooth , he is suddenly horrified to see the corpse of floating out of the hull , one of his eyes missing . Hooper drops the tooth and his flashlight and rushes to the surface . and make yet another attempt to reason with the mayor , hoping their latest discoveries will make a difference . , however , still stubbornly dismisses their arguments , insisting that even with the evidence of 's ravaged boat , there is no proof that a shark is responsible . explains that he pulled the tooth of a out of the hull of 's boat , but merely rebuffs him once again since can not produce the tooth he dropped in the water . Though he allows and to take precautions to keep the beaches safe , he refuses to close them . weekend finally arrives , bringing plenty of tourists , but the beachgoers are made uneasy by the numerous police boats patrolling the water for the shark . is concerned that no one is swimming , and asks a personal friend in attendance to enter the water , along with his wife and grandchildren , to put everyone 's minds at ease . The man and his family reluctantly and warily obey , and others begin to relax and follow suit . Remaining on the beach , is aiding with shark patrol . When his elder son ( ) wishes to take his new sailboat out into the water with his friends , asks him to take it into the adjacent estuary just to be safe . reluctantly agrees . In the meantime , a dorsal fin appears among the swimmers in the main water , and panic erupts . The crowd scrambles back onto the beach and the police boats close in , only to discover that the " shark " is merely a cardboard fin wielded by two young pranksters in snorkel gear . The beachgoers begin to relax , but a young woman overlooking the water sees the unmistakable form of a huge shark making its way into the estuary where and his friends are sailing . The woman 's cry is first dismissed as another prank , but when reminds her husband that their son is in the pond , goes to investigate . and his friends are approached by a man in a rowboat ( ) , who is instructing them on knotting techniques , when both vessels are suddenly capsized by the shark . The startled sailors surface , and watches in paralyzed horror as the man fails to reach his rowboat before the shark rips him apart . and his friends are brought safely to shore , though is taken to the hospital to be treated for shock . Brody confronts once again and puts his foot down , demanding that real action be taken to deal with the shark . , for once , is vulnerable and shaken , realizing that his own children were on the beach that day as well . He finally relents and gives full permission to close the beaches and do all that is necessary to stop the shark . is immediately hired . Though , a vastly experienced shark hunter , desires to take on the mission alone , insists that he and will go as well . There is instant tension between and , with seeing as a rich snob with no real shark - hunting experience , and Hooper seeing as a reckless thrill - seeker with a bullish attitude . Though proves himself to be a capable sailor , the discomfort remains as the three men embark on their voyage in 's boat , the " . "Once out to sea , the men set about attracting the shark by ladling chum off the stern of the boat . attaches a line of piano wire to a sturdy rod secured against a specially - designed fishing chair on the deck . After hours of waiting , the wire goes taut and eventually snaps as the immense creature swims under the boat before disappearing again . , , and realize the enormous strength of their adversary . As the voyage presses on with no further sign of the shark , grumpily ladles more chum off the back of the boat when , without warning , the massive head of a Great shark emerges briefly in their wake . is stunned and alerts the others . notices the shark beginning to circle the boat , and rushes out for a look . He estimates that the shark is 25 feet long , and weighs three tons . After barking orders to and , begins to fire harpoons tied to plastic barrels , intended to both slow the shark down and make its presence more visible . Though hits the shark with three harpoons , the barrels have no effect and the shark easily pulls them underwater . Just in time , manages to attach a tracking device to the beast before it retreats again . That night , the men have dinner and drinks below deck , and surprisingly begins to bond with as they compare scars from their experiences with various sea creatures . Brody notices that has had a tattoo removed , and admits that the former tattoo represented the cruiser , on which he had been a sailor in . goes on to illustrate the horrible day in of 1945 when the was sunk by torpedoes , leaving over 1,100 men floundering in shark - infested waters . witnessed 800 of his comrades being picked off by sharks , and is clearly affected by the chilling memory . The experience , combined with survivor 's guilt , had ignited 's deep - seated hatred of sharks and the ruthless satisfaction he finds in hunting them . After the solemnity of 's story , the men sing a rowdy sea chantey to lighten the mood , but are interrupted by the returning shark violently crashing into the boat and causing a leak . rushes on deck and fires a rifle at the three telltale barrels , but the shark escapes once again . The next day , the men attempt to repair the boat , with limited success . Seawater has contaminated the diesel fuel , and the black smoke billowing from the exhaust pipe confirms engine damage . When the shark returns , instructs to grab the barrels with a hook and secure them to the stern . Hooper succeeds , and attempts to drag the shark by powering the boat to full throttle , but the shark uses its incredible strength to pull the boat in the opposite direction , nearly capsizing it and causing further structural damage before cuts the ropes attached to the boat . The shark breaks free from the barrels and submerges again . demonstrates his mad obsession with shark hunting by destroying the radio on which was attempting to call for help . The shark begins to chase the boat , and steers back toward land at full speed , dismissing 's protests that he is overtaxing the already damaged engine . When the engine inevitably fails , the boat is left to slowly sink . , strangely calm , offers life jackets to the other men , though he takes none for himself . Running out of options , resorts to putting on his scuba gear and having and lower him into the water inside a shark - proof cage , his aim being to inject the shark with poison using a harpoon syringe . points out that the needle is too small to pierce the shark 's hide , but believes he can inject the beast in the mouth . The cage proves to be no match for the shark , who attacks with such ferocity that he drops the harpoon and is forced to hide in a reef while his cage is destroyed . and haul up the remains of the shark cage , and can only assume that is dead . They barely have time to react before the shark leaps from the water like a breaching whale and lands most of its body on the sinking stern of the boat , nearly breaking the vessel in two . and desperately cling to the cabin as the boat is upended , with the shark 's gaping mouth at the bottom of the drop . ultimately loses his grip and , despite 's efforts to pull him to safety , slides into the mouth of the shark and is gruesomely killed . The shark , with 's bloodied corpse in its mouth , slides back into the water . Horrified , and believing himself to be the only survivor of this seemingly doomed mission , hastily enters the cabin of the rapidly sinking boat and finds one of 's pressurized air tanks . The shark smashes through the side of the boat , its enormous mouth perilously close to , who attempts to fend it off by bludgeoning it with the tank . The shark retreats , with the air tank now lodged in its jaws . With little more than the boat 's mast remaining above water , climbs to its summit with a rifle in his hand . Now possessing some of 's courage and madness , begins to fire at the approaching shark , aiming at the air tank in its mouth . At last , hits his mark . The tank explodes , taking the shark 's head with it , and laughs triumphantly as blood and shark flesh rain down around him into the sea . Moments after the shark 's vibrant destruction , finally surfaces , and the exhausted is relieved to see him alive . The men share a weak chuckle before assembling a makeshift raft and paddling back to 's shore.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > , the late 1950s . ( ) , a lonely and painfully shy teenager , who is under pressure by his stern parents because he must live up to his older brother 's reputation to attend and become a lawyer , arrives for the new semester at the for boys -- 's brother also attended and was a popular and well - regarded student there . This semester begins during an orientation gathering with a speech given by the stern ( ) , who states the academy 's four pillars : Tradition , , , and . meets ( ) a friendly and ambitious student whom becomes his dorm roommate . Later in his dorm , is ordered by his grumpy and domineering father ( ) to drop his involvement with the school annual in order to maintain good grades so the boy may become a doctor much as he has done . is under pressure from his stern father 's will . Also , tells that also wants him to become a doctor , which further worries the boy . A little later , tells that he is in a similar situation with his parents involving his older brother who also attended a few years ago , graduated , and attended and became a lawyer and his parents want the exact same thing for him . But does not have the courage to tell his parents that he instead wants to be a writer , not a lawyer . During the first day of classes and experience the various teaching methods which include speeches by the trig teacher , as well as the Latin teacher , and the chemistry teacher who states that " all 20 questions at the end of the first chapter are due tomorrow " . In stark contrast to these orthodox teaching methods , the guys see a different side of the school when they attend English class taught by the newly arrived ( and liberal - minded ) ( ) , whom they met briefly during the orientation -- tells his class he was also a student at " " ( as the students secretly refer to the institution ) himself many years ago . Keating enters his class smiling and whistling the 1812 , and he first takes the boys out in the hallway to the school 's displays cases containing photos and artifacts of the school 's sports achievements . He tells them that they all have the potential to become powerful individuals , and they are responsible for what their futures will hold . These two actions show his difference from the other teachers because no other teacher would commit the actions he does . Also , he tells the boys they may call him " Oh , my Captain " , ( the title of a poem by about ) if they dare . These examples of 's teachings show the boys how to think for themselves . then tells the boys " " , which is for " seize the . In addition to and , a small group of other students whom include the lovesick ( ) , the flip ( ) , the pragmatic ( ) , liberal ( ) and the moderate ( ) , also react to the first day 's lesson with comments from " that was weird " to " neat " . asks if anything told them will be on a future test and the boys respond with mild scorn . The next day starts the class with a traditional teaching approach by having read out loud the introduction to their poetry textbook , which describes how to rate the quality of poetry according to mathematical plotting . Keating finds such mathematical criticism ridiculous and instructs his pupils to rip out the essay which is one of three ways that he demonstrates freedom of expression and non - conformity . When some students hesitate , he tells them " this is not the . This is a battle , a war . You will have to learn to think for yourselves . few days later , is asked to attend a dinner party at the household , friends of his parents . When he arrives , a beautiful girl answers the doorbell and intently captures his attention . Later , he learns that the girl , , is dating , but does not give up the hope of dating her . One day , finds an old yearbook with in it . After seeing that listed " " as one of his activities at the school , the boys ask what this was . He replies that the was a secret club dedicated to taking the meaning out of life . To do so , the members would sit in a cave near a certain pond less then a mile from school grounds and recite poetry , philosophically drawing life lessons from it to enhance their lives and appreciation of literature . With this new idea in their head from asking what the was , and the boys decide to start up the DPS once again . While coming inside after recess , convinces the boys to join the DPS and meet at midnight by the creek to start their first meeting . tells them that he will come along to the meeting as long as he does not have to read any poetry . When they arrive at the cave , the boys hold their first meeting . Knox shows up so that he can build confidence , like learning pretty poetry , to swoon . The boys begin to learn how rhythm and language in poetry can enhance their own learning and life experience . During their next poetry class , makes the boys stand on his desk to see the world from a different perspective , another way he demonstrates non - conformity and freedom . At the end of class , orders the boys to write an original poem for homework which will be read aloud during 's class . As he leaves the room , singles out and tells him he knows such an assignment frightens him . 's unorthodox teaching methods soon circulate quietly among the other teachers who scorn his liberal and idealist methods . During dinner , the Latin teacher tells , " you are taking a big risk in making your students think they are artists " . Keating replies : " I 'm only trying to make them free thinkers " . The Latin teacher , a reader of the literature movement , rebukes him by saying , " free thinkers at age seventeen ? " , reciting some poetry from a poet to emphasize his point . Keating recites another line " It is only in their minds that men can truly be free . always thus , and always thus shall be . " When the professor asks him if that passage belongs to a poet , smiles , telling him he 'd made it up on the spot . attempts to seize the day by trying out for a part in the play ' A ' the school is putting on -- such an act is done in full defiance of his father 's wishes . Meanwhile , goes to a nearby public high school football game and sees in the arms of , who is a football player at that school . Back in English class , has the boys kick soccer balls while yelling poetry aloud , the final way that he demonstrates freedom and non - conformity . Then , receives a letter that says he got the part of in the play . Now he must forge a letter of permission to the headmaster and , along with their signature of approval . The next day in class , tells to stand up and recite his poem . When tells his teacher that he did not write a poem , tells the boy to make one up right now on the spur of the moment , taking him to the front of the room . 's new poem is about a portrait of on the wall , and seems to have an astounding affect on . Todd improvises with 's aggressive but kind coaching and he refers to as the " snaggly - toothed madman . " The rest of the class , including one of the more cynical students applaud 's efforts . By pulling the boy out of his seat in front of the class and create his own poem , successfully reaches out to and builds his confidence . That night , the boys meet at the cave to hold another DPS meeting , and afterwords gets the courage to phone , who invites him to a party at the home . The following day , teaches tells the boys not to conform , and gets the same desk pen set from his parents that they got him last year for his birthday . finds sitting alone and disappointed and boosts his roommate 's confidence by telling him that he should take the desk set and throw it to see how aerodynamic it is . 's mood is instantly improved . When goes to 's party that night , he 's asked by several of the local high school 's football players to join them in a toast to his brother , a football hero , despite ' insistence he 's not their guy . Later , he becomes drunk and finds himself sitting next to a mostly unconscious on the couch . He recalls 's words " " and kisses her , only to be caught by , who punches him out . Though comes to his aid , leaves the party . The day after the meeting , which is also attended by some girls invited , writes a joking and anonymous letter on behalf of the DPS to the school asking if girls may be admitted to . also takes the bold but foolish step of signing the letter from the . During a hastily arranged school meeting which addresses this letter , a phone is heard ringing . pulls out a hidden phone , answers it and says the call is from " " and that wants girls to attend . The school 's headmaster holds a private meeting with , demanding to know who is in the . refuses and the headmaster paddles him harshly . The headmaster later talks to , telling him he is aware of 's unorthodox teaching methods and that encouragement of free - thinking among the students is dangerous . Keating later talks to and the boys , telling the recovering that " sucking the marrow out of life does n't mean choking on the bone . " In the newer era of the school , where discipline is much harsher , pranks like 's can have the effect of hurting a student 's future rather than making them a school legend . When 's father arrives at on an unexpected visit , he scolds for joining the play and orders him to quit . tells about the incident , and that his father wo n't allow to act . To this , suggests that tell his father how the boy truly feels . does , but his bossy and stubborn father continues to refuse to let him partake in the play and tells that he must focus all his energy on studying to become a doctor . A few days later , lies to and tells him that his father allowed him to continue with the play . When goes to 's high school , he embarrasses her in class by giving her flowers and reciting poetry . goes to where she angrily tells that his actions embarrassed her in front of her classmates . Knox apologizes and asks if she would go to 's play with him . is again embarrassed , but flattered by the attention displays , accepts his offer as a date . At the theatre , gives a great performance as . As he is about to give 's closing monologue , spots his father looking stern and angry from the back but receives a standing ovation . is angrily driven home by his father , who also tells to stay away from his son . While at home , tells that in retaliation for his defiance , he will pull out of and forcibly enroll him in to prepare him for and a career in medicine . Unable to cope with the future that awaits him or make his stern and narrow - minded father understand his emotions , commits suicide by shooting himself with his father 's gun . The next day in school , the boys are told of 's suicide and in separate meetings , each is questioned about the DPS after reveals the club 's secrets to the headmaster . is expelled from the when he punches for betraying them . 's defense of his actions is that they can all save their respective futures at the school if they cooperate , even if they ca n't keep from being fired . When is called to 's office , where his parents are waiting , forces to admit to being a member of the , and tries to make him sign a document blaming for abusing his authority , inciting the boys to restart the , and encouraging to flout his father 's authority . sees 's , 's , 's and 's signatures already on the document . At first , refuses to sign , but when threatens to expel him and his equally stern parents threaten to disown him should he be kicked out of school , the painfully shy does not have the nerve to argue with any of them and signs the paper . Keating is fired from and is forced to leave without any severance pay or letter of recommendation to teach at any other public or private school in the state . Although the other teachers at have disapproved of his teaching methods , most of them are somewhat upset to see the likable and friendly next day , arrives at English class where he tells the students that he is their new teacher until a substitute will arrive to replace him . The shy and afraid can not respond when asked what the boys have done in the class so far , so asks . He tells the teacher that the class thoroughly covered poetry , but skipped over . The headmaster tells them they will start over and to read the introduction to their textbook , but it is ripped out , so he gives the teacher 's book to read from . Just then , enters the room to collect a few of his papers before he leaves . Todd reveals to that he and the other students were intimidated into signing the confession . Keating tells that he already knows . Nolan orders to be quiet and demands that leave , threatening any other student who speaks up with expulsion . As is about to exit the classroom , finally breaks through his cowardice and self - pity and calls out : " O Captain ! My Captain ! " and then stands on top of his desk and faces , giving him a farewell salute . immediately yells at to sit down or face expulsion . In what is probably the movie 's most touching and emotionally powerful scene , one by one , , , , and all of the members of the , except for and a few other students , climb onto their desks and face to salute their former teacher . Knowing they are too many for the school to expel en masse quietly , they remain standing on their desks despite 's orders for them to sit back down until he gives up and slumps against the teacher 's desk , angry and emotionally defeated . Seeing that his work at the school had not been in vain , a visibly touched says : " Thank you , boys . Thank you . " With and the other the students looking on , then happily leaves the classroom with tears in his eyes , and walks out of the school for good.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > A tumbleweed rolls up a hillside just outside of as a mysterious man known as The ( ) narrates about a fella he wants to tell us about named . With not much use for his given name , however , goes by the name The ( ) . The describes as one of the laziest men in , which would place him " high in the running for laziest worldwide " , but nevertheless " the man for his place and time . "The year is 1990 . The Dude , wearing a bathrobe and flops , buys a carton of cream at a local 's grocery store with a post - dated check for 69 cents . On the TV , is addressing the nation , saying " aggression will not stand " against . Dude returns to his apartment where , upon entering and closing the door , he is promptly grabbed by two men who force him into the bathroom and shove his head in the toilet . They demand money owed to , saying that The 's wife claimed he was good for it , before one of the thugs , ( ) , urinates on The Dude 's rug saying , " Ever thus to deadbeats , ! " , convinces them that they have the wrong person as he 's not married and ca n't possibly possess the amount of money they 're asking . Looking around , the first thug , ( ) , realizes they 've made a mistake and must have the wrong . Regardless , they break one of his bathroom tiles before leaving . " At least I 'm housebroken " , Dude calls after them . Dude meets up with his bowling team at the local alley and talks to them about his violent encounter . ( ) reacts with anger and vengeance on his mind , often speaking of his time served in to relate to the issue . Slow - witted ' ' ( ) , often entering conversations halfway through , pipes in but is promptly told by , " You 're out of your element " . then tells about a millionaire who shares 's name and must be the one the thugs were after . agrees to meet with the " " , hoping to get compensation for his rug since it " really tied the room together " and figures that his wife , , should n't be owing money around town . Arriving at 's mansion , is assisted by ( ) who shows him numerous awards and pictures illustrating 's endeavors in philanthropy before meets the man himself . The elder and wheelchair - bound ( ) brings into his study where he quickly gets to the point and professes that he ca n't take responsibility for every spoiled rug in the city and accuses of seeking a handout , clearly resentful of his hippie - like demeanor . Dude leaves the room and tells that offered any rug in the house to him . He quickly picks one out and , as it 's being loaded into 's car , he speaks to a young blonde woman ( ) poolside who is painting her toenails green . She asks to blow on her toes , assuring him that ( ) , the man in the pool , wo n't mind because he 's a nihilist . appears and introduces her as , 's much younger trophy wife , before she offers fellatio for $ 1,000 . nervously laughs and escorts out . During a league game at the alley , scolds for bringing his ex - wife 's small dog in a kennel with him while she is in with her new boyfriend . As they debate , a member of the opposite team , ( ) , bowls an 8 and tells the to mark it , but objects , stating 's foot was over the line . When argues , pulls out a gun and aims it in 's face , forcing him to comply and void the score as a zero . As sits down again , he explains , " It 's a league game , , there are rules " . Dude scolds as they leave , trying to act casual as police units arrive and run past them into the alley . Afterwards , relaxing in his apartment and enjoying a Russian drink ( his favorite cocktail ) , listens to his phone messages : calling to talk about the gun incident , asking to call him , and the bowling administrator wishing to speak about 's belligerence and gun - brandishing on the lanes . 's doorbell rings and his landlord , ( ) , reminds to pay his rent and informs him that he 's performing a dance at a local theater and would like to attend to give him notes . The obliges as rings again , telling that needs to see him and that it 's not about the rug . At the mansion , solemnly leads into the study where he finds crying beside the lit fireplace . He shows a crude note describing 's kidnapping and the demand for $ 1 million . " This is a bummer , man , " the offers as he smokes a joint . explains that they want to act as courier to deliver the payment when they receive word of a location for the drop off and tells that he might even recognize the kidnappers as the same people who soiled his rug . Back at the bowling alley , a Hispanic man wearing a hairnet and a purple jumpsuit with ' ' embroidered on the front bowls a perfect strike . A few lanes down , , , and watch him with slight resentment . Dude compliments on ' ( ) skill but criticizes him for being a ' pederast ' , having served six months for exposing himself to an eight year - old before asking about the arrangement . explains that he will receive $ 20,000 as courier and shows the beeper gave him . He does n't worry about the hand off and figures that kidnapped herself for some extra money . seems to take 's offense personally as walks over , telling them to watch out for his team and if they flash a piece at the finals " I 'll take it away from you , stick it up your ass and pull the fucking trigger till it goes click . "At his apartment , lies happily on his new rug , listening to a taped bowling game through headphones . He opens his eyes and sees a red - haired woman ( ) and two men standing over him before he is punched in the face and knocked out by them . He dreams that he is flying over , chasing a woman who is riding his rug ahead of him . A bowling ball suddenly appears in his hand and pulls him to the ground where he stands , miniaturized , facing a gigantic bowling ball as it rolls towards him . He tenses and winds up in one of the finger holes of the ball . From his perspective , we see the ball roll down the lane away from its female bowler towards the pins . As the pins scatter , the wakes up to the sound of his beeper going off and finds that his rug has been taken from underneath him . Answering the page , Dude returns to 's mansion where explains that the kidnappers want the exchange to happen that very night . He gives Dude a portable phone and a briefcase with the money , instructing him to take it up the highway and wait for the kidnappers to call . Once the exchange is complete , is to call immediately . Before he leaves , repeats to Dude that " her life is in your hands" . Despite 's instructions to go alone , picks up from his store . gets in the drivers seat and immediately proposes a plan for a switch , holding his own briefcase full of dirty underwear , so that he and can keep the million themselves . also plans to capture one of the kidnappers and beat 's location out of him . is adamantly against the crazy plan but when the kidnappers call , accidentally lets slip that he 's not alone . The kidnappers hang up and Dude panics that is as good as dead , though reminds him of his own suspicions that kidnapped herself . The kidnappers call again and give a location granted there is no funny ' schtuff ' . At the designated location , the kidnappers call and instruct The Dude to throw the suitcase out the car window onto a bridge . As they approach the bridge , tries to throw the real suitcase but , at the last second , tosses the ringer and forces Dude to take the wheel as he arms himself with an and bails out of the moving car . Despite his seemingly flawless and heroic plan , loses grip of the and it fires wildly , hitting 's tail lights and tires , causing him to panic and crash into a telephone pole . Three men on motorcycles appear just beyond the bridge and , as scrambles out of the car with the briefcase , pick up the ringer and ride off . calmly gets up and says , " Fuck it , . go . At the alley , the portable phone rings incessantly , no doubt calling to check on the mission . is miserable , angry at , and certain that will be killed , though is calm and convinced that kidnapped herself . He tells not to worry and that will eventually get bored and return home on her own but becomes dismayed to see that the bowling schedule has him playing on ; something he is forbidden to do since he is and must honor the Jewish day of rest . The wonders why did n't go back to being Catholic since he only converted for his ex - wife . Donny interjects mid - conversation and is , again , told to ' shut the fuck up ' by . As they leave , discovers his car missing - along with the briefcase . suggests it was towed because they parked in a handicapped spot but is certain that it was stolen . He starts walking home with his phone ringing . Dude resolves to call the police and issue a statement for his stolen car . Two police officers ( , ) arrive at his apartment to take notes and addresses the separate issue of his missing rug just before his home phone rings . The answering machine records a woman introducing herself as and saying that she is the one who took his rug and has sent a car to pick up at his apartment . The younger of the two cops is pleased that the missing rug issue is resolved . The is brought to a huge loft studio filled with canvases and minimal illumination . As he walks in , he is startled by the sudden appearance of , swinging in naked on a zip line , screaming and flailing paintbrushes over a large canvas to create an abstract image . She descends to the ground and is robed before addressing The Dude . She explains that she is a professional artist whose work is commended as strongly vaginal , often to the point of making some men uncomfortable . She tells Dude that the rug he took was a gift from her to her late mother and her father , , had no right giving it away . 's flamboyant assistant , ( ) , watches as fixes himself a and puts a tape in her VCR . She asks if he enjoys sex as the video rolls ; a smut film starring and , the German nihilist , credited as . Maude surmises that kidnapped herself , elaborating on the already obvious notion that she gets around and even bangs the producer of the film , . As one of two trustees of , one of 's charity programs , noticed a withdrawal of $ 1 million from its funds and was told it was for the ransom . Though she is more or less estranged from her father , she does n't want to involve the police in his embezzlement and offers the ten percent of the one million if he retrieves the money from the kidnappers . With a finder 's fee she tells him he can buy himself a new rug . She then apologizes for the crack on the jaw and gives The a number for a doctor who will examine him free of charge . The is given a limo ride back to his apartment where the driver ( ) points out a blue that had been following them . Before The has a chance to do anything about it , he 's shoved into another limo waiting for him on the street . Inside , and confront him about the fact that he never called them and yell that the kidnappers never got the money . accuses of stealing the million himself as tries to reason that the ' royal we ' dropped off the money and that , since she apparently owes money all over town , most likely kidnapped herself and probably instructed her kidnappers to lie about the hand off . and look skeptical before producing an envelope . tells Dude that the kidnappers will be dealing directly with him now and any mishaps will be avenged tenfold on him . Inside the envelope , finds a severed pinky toe wrapped in gauze with green polish on the nail . In a small cafe , The tells about the severed toe who does n't believe it 's 's . calls the kidnappers a bunch of " fucking amateurs " for using such an obviously fake ruse but The is n't convinced . tries to convince him by saying that he can get a toe for him in no time at all and with his choice of nail polish color . Despite 's unwavering stance , Dude fears for his life ; if the kidnappers do n't get him , will . At home , the tries to relax in the bathtub , smoking a joint and listening to music . His phone rings and the answering machine records the telling him that they 've recovered his car . Dude is overjoyed for a moment until he hears a loud banging in his living room . He looks up to see three men breaking into his apartment wearing dark clothes . The leader , whom Dude recognizes as / the nihilist , along with his two cohorts , and ( , ) , enters the bathroom with a ferret on a leash . He dunks the terrified animal in the tub where it thrashes and shrieks as tries to avoid it . takes the ferret out , letting it shake off , and tells Dude that they want their money tomorrow or they 'll cut off his johnson . The following morning , the goes to the impound lot to collect his car which turns up badly damaged and reeking with a terrible stench , an apparent victim of a joyride and temporary home to some vagrants . The briefcase is gone . asks the officer at the lot if anyone is following up on who might have taken the car , but the officer ( ) chuckles and sarcastically says that their department has them working in shifts on the case . At the bar in the bowling alley , expresses his fears to an unsympathetic and an unhelpful Donny . Unable to cheer him up , they leave at the bar to find an open lane . The sits down next to Dude and orders a sarsaparilla before chatting briefly with , complimenting him on his style and wondering why he uses so many cuss words . He offers one piece of advice before leaving : " Sometimes you eat the bar , and sometimes the bar , well , he eats you . " , the bartender ( ) , hands Dude the phone ; it 's . She 's miffed that has n't seen the doctor yet and instructs him to meet her at her loft . There , informs that he thinks was really kidnapped , possibly by . Maude disagrees , saying that knows and the kidnappers can not be acquaintances . She then dismisses to take a call , reminding him to see the doctor . At the clinic the doctor tells to remove his shorts , insisting despite 's assurance that he was only hit in the face . Driving home , enjoys a joint while listening to but soon notices a blue following him . Distracted , he tries to flick his joint out the window but it bounces back and lands in his lap , burning him . He screams and dumps beer on his lap before he swerves and crashes into a dumpster . When he looks out the window , the blue car is gone . Looking down , he notices a piece of paper stuck in the car seat . It 's a graded homework sheet with the name written on it . That night , at 's dance quartet , reveals that he 's done some research on and discovered where he lives , near the - - joint . He is also thrilled to report that 's father is , a famous screenwriter who wrote 156 episodes of the show ( 1965 ) . is certain that has the briefcase of money and that their troubles are over . They pull up to the house where The is dismayed to see a brand new parked on the street outside . A Hispanic housekeeper ( ) lets them into the ' home where they see the elderly ( ) in an iron lung in the living room . Over the hissing of the compressor , calls out that he 's a big fan of 's and that his work was a source of inspiration to him before the housekeeper brings in young ( ) , a 15 - year - old with a deadpanned expression . Walter and interrogate about the money and the fact that he stole 's car , but they get no response ... not even a wavering glance from the teenager . Walter resolves to go to ; he tells to watch out the window as he and go back out to the car where is waiting . removes a tire iron from trunk and proceeds to smash the corvette , shouting , " This is what happens when you fuck a stranger in the ass!"However , the car 's real owner ( ) comes out of his house and rips the tire iron from , shouting that he just bought the car last week , before going over to The 's car and breaking all the windows . Dude drives silently home , wind blowing in through the broken windows , as and eat In - - Out burgers . Back home , Dude talks to over the phone as he nails a two - by - four to the floor near the front door . He yells at , telling him to leave him alone and that he wants to handle the situation himself before agreeing to go to their next bowling practice . He hangs up and props a chair against the door , braced by the piece of wood , and turns away as the door opens outwardly and 's two thugs from the beginning of the film walk in . They tell The that wishes to meet with him . The is taken to a large mansion overlooking a beach front where a tribal , orgy - like party is going on . Inside , meets porno producer ( ) who appears friendly and agreeable as he mixes the a and sympathizes for his lost rug . asks him where is to which responds that he thought knew . denies knowing anything about 's abduction and theorizes that faked her own kidnapping and then ran off knowing how much money she owed him . is then excused for a phone call . He writes something down on a notepad before leaving the room momentarily . Employing the trick of rubbing a pencil lightly over the pad of paper to see what was written , reveals a doodle of a man with a rather large penis . He rips the paper out of the pad and sticks it in his pocket before returning to the couch as comes back . He offers a ten percent finder 's fee if he tells them where the money is . tells him that should have the money , though is not convinced . insists he 's telling the truth as his words begin to slur and his vision glazes over . He mumbles , " All the ever wanted was his rug back ... it really tied the room together , " before he passes out ... drugged from the drink . The falls into a deep dream where he sees himself happily starring in a - produced bowling picture entitled ' ' with , dressed in a seducing Viking outfit , as his costar . They dance together and throw a bowling ball down the lane . The ball turns into the Dude , floating above the lane floor and passing under ladies ' skirts . When he hits the pins at the end , he suddenly sees the three nihilists dressed in tight clothes and snapping super large scissors , chasing him . He runs from them , terrified , as he wakes from his dream , staggering down a street in while a police car pulls up behind him . The unit picks him up as he slurs the theme song to ' Branded' . At the police station , the chief of police ( ) goes through The 's wallet before he tells that phoned them to report that he was drunk and disorderly at his ' garden party ' . He tells that is an important source of income in and demands that he stay out of the town for good . Dude replies that he was n't listening which incites the chief to throw his coffee mug at him , hitting him in the head . Dude takes a taxi ride home and requests that the driver ( ) change the radio station since he had a rough night and hates the . The hostile driver does n't take kindly to this and throws The out . As he stands on the street , a red convertible passes by at high speed unnoticed by the Dude ; it 's listening to ' ' and , as we see , with a complete set of toes on each foot . Dude returns to his apartment to find it completely wrecked . He enters and trips over the two - by - four he nailed into the floor . When he looks up , he finds standing before him dressed in nothing but his robe . She drops it to the floor and tells him to make love to her . Afterwards , they lie in bed together as The smokes a joint and tells her about his past as a student activist and his current hobbies which include bowling and the occasional acid flashback . As he climbs out of bed to make a White Russian drink , asks about the apartment and explains that 's thugs most likely vandalized it looking for 's money . Maude retorts that her father actually has no money ; the $ 1 million cash was all her mother 's or else belongs to the and that 's only concern is to run the charities . Maude gives him an allowance but his weakness is vanity ; " Hence the slut " . She tells Dude this as she folds into a yoga position which she claims increases the chances of conception . Dude chokes on his drink but assures him that she has no intention of having be a part of the child - bearing process nor does she want to see him socially . The then figures that 's why she wanted him to visit the doctor so badly until an idea suddenly comes to mind about . Dude calls to pick him up and take him to 's mansion right away , despite 's protests that he does n't drive on unless it 's an emergency . Dude assures him that it 's just that . Dude dresses and goes outside where he sees the blue parked just down the street . He walks over and demands that the man within get out . The man introduces himself as ( ) and explains that he thinks is a fellow private eye who is brilliantly playing two sides against each other ; the thugs and , and means no harm to him or his girlfriend . Confused , tells to stay away from his ' lady friend ' and asks if he 's working for or . admits that he 's employed by the 's ; 's family . Apparently , 's real name is and she ran away from her home a year ago and 's been investigating since . As pulls up , tells to , again , stay away from his lady friend and leaves . At a local restaurant , the three German nihilists and a sallow , blonde woman ( ) sit together ordering pancakes . The camera pans down to the woman 's foot covered in a bandage which , where her pinky toe should be , is soaked in dried blood . Driving out to mansion , explains his new theory ; why did do nothing to him if he knew the payoff never happened ? If thought that The took the money , why did n't he ask for it back ? Because the briefcase given to was never full of money since the never opened it to look at the contents : " You threw a ringer out for a ringer ! " He also figures that chose him , an otherwise " fuck - up " , to get back because he never wanted her back ; he wanted her dead while he embezzled money from the foundation as a ransom . agrees with the theory but still believes he should n't have been bothered on the . As they pull up to the mansion , they see 's red convertible crashed into some shrubbery near the front fountain . is running around the grounds naked while , inside , attempts to pick up her discarded clothes . He tells them that went to visit friends in without telling anyone and she has returned . Despite his protests , and walk past him into the study where a stern - looking sits . Dude demands an answer ; he accuses of keeping the million for himself while he used The as a scapegoat to cover up for the missing money . says that it 's his word against 's and no one would believe a " deadbeat " over him . This angers who figures to be a fake handicap besides a phony millionaire and lifts out of his chair , dropping him to the floor . However , lies still on the floor , whimpering , and tells to help him back in his chair . At the bowling alley , misses a strike for the first time and puzzles over this as drones on about the war in as it relates to to The who does n't seem to be paying attention as he paints over his fingernails with clear polish . walks over , criticizing the change in schedule from to before issuing sexual threats . The , , and sit unfazed . As they leave the alley and head into the parking lot , they are faced by the three German nihilists once again who stand in front of The 's flaming car with a portable radio blasting German techno music . " Well , they finally did it , " he despairs . " They killed my fucking car . "The nihilists demand the money or they will kill the girl , but tells them that he knows they never had the girl ( ) in the first place . The nihilists reply that they do n't care and still want the money but tries to explain that 's money was never valid ; he never intended to pay them off and shouts that without a hostage , there is no ransom . complains that his girlfriend had to give up her pinky toe because she thought she was getting $ 1 million but they 'll settle for whatever , , and have in their pockets . , in the back , asks if the men are going to hurt them and assures him that they 're nihilists and cowards as pulls out his wallet . When refuses to take his own out , pulls out a sword and engages in a fight with them , throwing his bowling ball into 's stomach . Walter attacks and bites off his ear , spitting it into the air . He unloads a heavy hit to 's face , calling him an " anti - " . He also hits in the face with his radio and bashes him in the back , knocking him out . He turns around and sees on the ground , clutching his chest . comforts him , saying 's having a heart attack . He orders The to call an ambulance . The and are then seen at a funeral parlor speaking with the curator . , having passed away , was cremated and they negotiate how his remains will be handled . is outraged at the high price of the urn . The curator tells them that the urn is their most " modestly - priced receptacle " and that the ashes must be given to them in a container of some sort . asks if there 's a 's store nearby and he and The resolve to receive 's ashes in a 's coffee can . They travel together to a windy cliff - side overlooking the ocean where gives a heartfelt speech about along with a seemingly unrelated reference to before opening the can and shaking out the ashes . The wind blows them back into 's face , coating his clothes , beard , and sunglasses . apologizes and attempts to brush the ashes off but the yells at him for always making everything a ' fucking travesty ' and scolds him for yet another needless rant . hugs him and tells him to " Fuck it , man ; let 's go bowling . " The eases down . At the bowling alley , the sits at the bar as the orders two beers . They greet each other and the asks how he 's been doing . " Oh , you know , strikes and gutters , ups and downs , " answers The as he collects his beers and goes to leave . The tells him to take it easy and The turns to reply , " Yeah , well , The abides . "In the final shot , the finds comfort in those words and rambles to the viewers about how things seem to have turned out fine for and . He was sad to see go but happens to know that there 's a little on the way . He assures us that The is always out there taking it easy for " all sinners " and orders another sarsaparilla drink for > 

 < synopsis > An elderly couple , and in the small town of pack and talk about their upcoming trip to to visit their adult children . Youngest daughter brings them box lunches and then leaves for work . A neighbor pops in and wishes them well . First , they visit their older son , , a family doctor in a modest suburb . sweeps up and prepares for the in - laws arrival . Their older son arrives from school and is upset to see his study desk has been moved to make way for the grandparents . arrives with his parents . , 's sister , comes too to visit the family , sits with them and makes small talk . The women plan a meal , they decide on sukiyaki but nixes . Daughter - in - law arrives with a dish and greets the elders warmly , bowing with respect . teases her mother about her weight . The grandson works on his English grammar homework . After dinner they all relax and continue chatting . and leave . The elders go upstairs to bed but sit and talk about 's career . The next day cleans up at her - . She tells her husband he does n't have to see her parents . Back at 's house the family prepares for a trip to the department store . Just before they leave a man comes to the door to tell the doctor that a patient is getting worse . calls off the trip and goes to see the sick child . The young boys are upset , so they start creating trouble , so has to punish them . , the older son , talks back to his mother and has a tantrum ; the younger , , goes for a walk with his grandmother . and her father - in - law talk about modern parenting . On a hillside and are together but the older woman finds it hard to connect with the boy . Then , the couple visit their second child . The family are upstairs resting . 's husband returns home with expensive cakes for his in - laws , but tells her husband that crackers would have been enough . Finally , they two eat the cakes themselves . She is a busy hairdresser , with no time to take the parents anywhere . calls them down and takes them to the public baths . then calls and asks her to take the day off and show her elders the next day . takes the on a bus tour of , they see the , new office buildings and bustling shopping districts . Later they go to 's modest apartment . She still has a framed photo of her late husband , , who had died in the war eight years earlier . enjoys the sake borrows from a neighbor . The elders are very thankful to for taking time with them . then plans with to send the parents to the . The resort is pleasant but at night the other guests drink and play mah - with loud music , and ca n't sleep . They decide to return to and want to go home . convinces them to stay in town a bit longer but has a beautician party that night . Both ca n't stay at 's small flat instead , will go to 's , will visit an old friend . Sadly , they make their way into the big town . meets his friend he has n't seen for 17 years . They gather another old friend and the three men go out drinking . They talk with some disappointment about their son 's careers and the younger generations , had hoped his doctor son would have had a better position . The grandmother encourages to re - marry again as she is still young . denies she is still carrying a torch and says she likes her lifestyle but lies awake thinking . A policeman delivers and friend to 's , they can barely walk and are completely wasted . gives them her futon but not before peevishly nagging her father . The grandparents decide to go back to their village sooner than expected . At the train station tells their children that they have been good to them , so if anything bad happens to the grandparents , they do n't need to visit to them in the village . Their youngest son lives in , on the way home . works for the rail company , his mother fell ill on the train and had to get off for the night . Tomi gets really sick soon . Telegrams are sent , and , and come up to visit . Very ill , passes away before dawn . arrives too late and admits with remorse he could have taken an earlier train . At a family lunch after the funeral they all reminisce . and plan to return to , asks for her mother 's grey sash and a certain kimono . stays for almost a week , helping . The village daughter brands her older siblings as " ungrateful , rude ... " . is thankful and again urges to marry again and move forward . Finally , the sister - in - law needs to go back to her job as well . sits and watches the scenery.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > After having led numerous military battles against the during the ' , of is captured near and eventually brought to , to stand trial for heresy by French clergymen loyal to the . On 30 1431 is interrogated by the French clerical court . Her judges try to make her say something that will discredit her claim or shake her belief that she has been given a mission by to drive the from , but she remains steadfast . One or two of them , believing that she is indeed a saint , support her . The authorities then resort to deception . A priest reads a false letter to the prisoner supposedly from of , telling her to trust in the bearer . When that too fails , is taken to view the torture chamber , but the sight , though it causes her to faint , does not intimidate her . When she is threatened with burning at the stake , she finally breaks and allows a priest to guide her hand in signing a confession . However , the judge then condemns her to life imprisonment . As the jailer shaves her head , she realises she has been unfaithful to . She demands that the judges return and she recants her confession . As more and more around her begin to recognise her true faith and calling she is permitted a final communion mass . She is then dressed in sack - cloth and taken to the place of execution . She helps the executioner tie her bonds . The crowds gather and the fire is lit . As the flames rise the women weep and a man cries out " you have burned a saint " . The troops prepare for a riot . As the flames consume the troops and crowd clash and people are killed . is consumed by the flames but they protect her soul as it rises to heaven.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) is a professional racer who is forced into early retirement due to a heart condition and goes into car sales . Warm and likable , he 's a natural salesman and a people person . He is also an incredible vehicle designer and engineer . Meanwhile , ( ) is a racer currently working as a mechanic and running his own shop to support his wife ( ) and son ( ) . He tells it like it is and sometimes gets customers angry , but he does n't sugarcoat anything . At a race , is told his car does not meet regulations and begins angrily yelling at the race official - spots this and calms him down , but afterward , the two get into an argument , and throws a wrench at him . Later , the comes and shuts down 's garage , and he 's forced to give up most of his racing in order to take care of his family . Meanwhile , at , ( ) is furious that sales are down and that his father 's company is in danger . He begins taking pitches from his underlings - ( ) pitches him an idea - the sexiest cars are race cars , like . He posits that if can win the , the 24 - hour race , they will be at the top . In order to do that , they fly to in order to offer the struggling a deal - they will buy the company and let ( ) maintain control of the racing division . uses this offer to get to make a good offer , and they buy . tells the businessmen to shove it and calls a fat pig . When they get back , makes them relay in detail what said , and he becomes more determined than ever to beat . He decides they will start their own racing division . approaches , as the only to ever win at , if he would be the head of their racing team , designing and testing the cars . agrees - and goes to , the best driver he knows , to take part . When sees heading out with , she angrily demands to know the truth . He tells her that he 's been offered great pay to race , and she 's thrilled - she just does n't want him to ever lie to her . The team begins getting the car into shape for their first big race , but as it approaches , vice president ( ) , approaches and tells them that 's rakish , unpredictable quality is not part of the brand and he ca n't be trusted to do press and represent well and that he ca n't be their driver . Carroll fights for , but is eventually forced to tell that he wo n't be racing - is furious . When loses the race , is able to convince to allow him to rehire . He goes to 's house and apologizes and asks him to come back , and the two end up getting into a physical fight on his front lawn . They finally give up , exhausted , and brings them some cold sodas . rejoins the team , who are working day and night trying to perfect the car . warns that is determined to have removed from the team , and intend on doing so on their next visit . Knowing this , when and arrive , locks in his office and takes out for a ride in the race car , and experiences just how terrifying and exhilarating racing is . When they stop , he breaks down into sobs . Carroll offers him a deal - let race at - if they win , he races at in . If they lose , gets full control over 's company . At , they find tough competition in a second team that had commissioned to see who engineered the best vehicle . is able to win the race , securing their team the spot at and ensuring will drive there . In , approaches . and are both in attendance . When the race starts , 's door wo n't shut , slowing him down on the first lap . The car that they had designed was able to accelerate to really high speeds , but doing so burned out the brakes , so deep into the race , the pit crew changes out the brakes . The at are furious , saying this is a violation of the rules , but points out the rule - book says they are allowed to change parts , and it is n't specified which ones . Eventually , 's car spins out and crashes , leaving in first place , and and are able to watch on TV as completes his much - desired " perfect " leg . , who had been trying to bypass and mess with their strategy , goes to and suggests that the best image for would be to have all three of their cars cross the finish together . He agrees , and gives the order , who refuses . tells the instruction but tells him it 's his race , and he will stand behind him no matter what . At first , speeds to the victory , but he eventually relents and slows down , allowing the other drivers to catch up and cross the finish together . Everyone celebrates 's win until a technicality - he started behind another car - puts him into second , not first . is furious , but accepts it , and the two go off together . Weeks later , while testing a new car design , the - , , who is not wearing safety gear while driving it , crashes and is killed . goes to his family 's home and finds , whom he gives the wrench that threw at him . He gets into his car , and despite his condition , speeds off into the distance . The post - script tells us that 's cars won the four years and that was inducted posthumously into the racing hall of > 

 < synopsis > Tensions between the and peoples lead to a civil war , in a country where corruption and bribes are routine . ( ) , the manager of , is but his wife , ( ) , is . His marriage is a source of friction with extremists , most prominently , a friendly supplier to the hotel who also is the local leader of , a brutal anti - Tutsi militia . As the political situation in the country deteriorates , and his family observe neighbors being dragged from their homes and openly beaten in the streets . curries favor with people of influence , bribing them with money and alcohol , seeking to maintain sufficient influence to keep his family safe . When civil war erupts and a officer threatens and his neighbors , barely negotiates their safety , and brings everyone to the hotel . More refugees come to the hotel from the overburdened camp , the , and orphanages . must divert the soldiers , care for the refugees , be a source of strength to his family , and maintain the appearance of a functioning high - class hotel , as the situation becomes more and more violent , with mobs in the streets just outside the gates . The forces , led by ( ) , are unable to take assertive action against the since they are forbidden to intervene in the genocide . The foreign nationals are evacuated , but the are left behind . When the forces attempt to evacuate a group of refugees , including 's family , they are ambushed and must turn back . In a last - ditch effort to save the refugees , speaks to the , ( ) and when the bribes no longer work , he blackmails him with threats of being tried as a war criminal . The family and the hotel refugees finally leave the besieged hotel in a convoy , and they travel through retreating masses of refugees and militia to reach safety behind rebel lines.limited details only</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > , home to the number one underdog fighter , ( ) . The date is 25 , 1975 , is fighting in a prize fight at a local church arena . The fight goes smooth through the first couple of rounds . Before beginning the next round , and get up from their corners after receiving advice from their corner - men and the fight continues . After a couple of punches , grabs a hold of and headbutts him in the face . The crowd goes restless on . , after recovering from the hit , goes after and finishes him off . The bell rings signaling the end of the fight and is pronounced the winner . and both leave the ring and head back to the locker room . One woman loser in the arena audience shouts at " you 're a bum ! " as he leaves the ring . In the locker room , and get their prize money for the fight in which gets $ 17.80 after taxes and gym expenses , 's winning prize is $ 40.50 after taxes and expenses . Rocky approaches and finds lying on a bed where he tells that he was " lucky" . walks home in the cold seedy night through the trash - strewn streets of in the crime - ridden neighborhood after the fight and arrives home to a small one - room apartment on a side street to feed his pet turtles , and . He grabs a can of the turtle food and recites himself a line regarding the item into the mirror . He then looks at a picture of himself from his youth and then grabs some ice from the freezer and puts it on the cut that gave him and lies down on his bed . The next morning , visits the local pet shop where ( ) works and talks about the turtle food that he bought . , being shy and quiet , does n't respond to even after he tells her a joke about the food . Her boss ( ) commands her to clean out the cat cages and she walks away not paying attention to . is walking down at the docks with a stick in his hand whistling , and out to collect money for his boss , a local loan shark . He finds a man riding a forklift and when the man sees , he drives away . chases him on foot when the man runs from the forklift and catches up to him demanding 's money totaling $ 200 or he 'll have to break one of the guy 's thumbs . He tells that he does n't have enough money but offers him his coat and around $ 130 . takes the money , but refuses to punish the deadbeat guy and instead gives him a warning . A little later , ( ) and his driver / ( ) , pick up on a bridge near the docks and tells him about the man and gives what money the deadbeat had on him . gives $ 20 for his collection assignment and tells him about more collection jobs in the coming days for 's other clients . The thug , , lets out a comment about 's face as he and get out of the car to talk in private . On the street , the calm but still angry asks why he did n't break the man 's thumb like he asked and tries to defend himself but does n't believe him . sternly reprimands to do what he tells him to do from now on because it is bad for 's reputation in the neighborhood . leaves by the side of the road and gets back in his car . Buddy further insults by calling him a " meat - bag " before driving away and angrily shouts : " I shoulda broke YOUR thumbs!."Later that day , goes to 's only to find out that his locker has been rented out to new - comer , and that his stuff is now hanging on a hook on " - " . the janitor tells about it and tells him where is . sees ( ) , a 76 - year - old elderly and temperamental former lightweight boxer , now a trainer , working with . goes to ask about the locker and admits that is an up - and - comer and is nothing . Echoing what the woman heckler told the previous night , calls a " bum " . Angry and dejected , leaves the gym . goes back to see at the pet store which is about to close for the night . asks her if she wants to go to see a basketball game , but she refuses the invitation . He then asks to walk her home and she again turns him down . He warns her about the people walking the streets at night and suggests that she take a taxi home . then goes to the 7 for a beer or two where he sees his best friend and 's older brother , ( ) , cursing up a storm in the restroom after the mirror has been broken . tells him about and he shouts at that she 's a loser and ca n't take care of herself . asks if he would like to take out on a date since she seldom leaves their house , and agrees . takes his beer and leaves . remains sitting at the bar drinking his own beer and watches TV and sees that the heavyweight boxing champion of the world , ( ) is on TV . and the bartender talk about him until leaves . On his way home , notices a group of teenage kids standing on the corner drinking and smoking cigarettes and sees that one of them is ( ) , an underage teen girl he knows . He pulls her out of the group and walks her home . On the way , he tells her about respect and the kind of people that she should be hanging out with . After reaching her house , she calls " " and he heads back home . The next day in , and his trainer are meeting with ( ) , a fight promoter , discussing the possible fighters for him to match in the biggest fighting event set to take place on 's . When it looks like there are no possible fighters , has a epiphany : he 'll take on a small time underdog fighter , giving him a shot at the title . Everyone agrees with the idea and the plan is set in motion . Meanwhile , is dropped off at his house by and after his latest collection job , and they talk about . Rocky wonders how they knew about him and . mildly replies : " I hear things " . Buddy further insults by calling a retard and how retards like the zoo and attempts to lunge at him , but separates them . He gives $ 50 for his date with . Before leaving , tells to take to the zoo and speeds off . At 's office , he and are looking through a book of local club fighters of and they come across who seems to be the perfect fighter . takes a liking to his nickname , " The . "That same evening , on the night of , and are walking home and keeps imploring to get him a job with as a collector , because he hates his current job at a meat packing factory . They reach 's house where is making dinner . She comes out of the kitchen to greet but does n't realize is with him . says ' hello ' and she walks back into the kitchen . goes to talk to her and she runs into her bedroom embarrassed . gets her out and tells to go out with for the night , but Adrian claims that it 's and she 's cooking a turkey . goes to the kitchen and grabs the turkey out of the and throws it out the back door . begins to cry and yells at her to go out . tells him to forget the date but instructs him to go talk to her . walks over to her door and talks to her through the door but does n't get any feedback . He asks her if she wants to go out with him and have a good time and she opens the door all dressed up ready to go . On 's advice , and Adrian head for the local ice rink . They look around and see that it 's empty and the maintenance man ( ) tells them that the rink is closed for the night . Rocky bribes him $ 10 and they have the rink for themselves for 10 minutes . 's skating as is running along side her telling her about the fights he 's been in and how it 's special to him . After their date , and go back to his apartment where she is hesitant about going inside . implores her that its okay and she follows behind him . Inside his apartment , feels uncomfortable admitting that she 's never been in a man 's apartment before . admits he does n't feel comfortable neither and he 's kind of nervous too . She wants to leave but stops her , trying to cheer her up giving her compliments . He tells her that she wants to kiss her and he does and the two end up kissing in his corner by the door . The next day , heads for 's and tells him that ' office called , possibly asking for sparring partners . says the same thing to himself and a frustrated yells at him . asks why after all this time 's been giving him the cold shoulder , but refuses to reply . Rocky demands to know and yells at him across the gym that had the talent and the heart to be a great fighter but instead became a " leg - breaker " for the local loan shark and bookie . defends his occupation and that it 's a living , but retorts that it 's a waste of life and he again calls " a bum" . goes to see and tells him that he is willing to help out with the sparring training with and tells him that he 'd give it his all . then offers a proposition into fighting with on on 's , however , declines . tells that it was him that chose to fight and that its a once in a lifetime shot to win the heavyweight boxing title . takes a minute to consider it . Back at 's house , , , and watch a TV interview with and about the upcoming fight and they see that 's been taunting through the whole session . tells that he should break his legs and that he should be able to win the fight . says that the taunts do n't bother him . tells has a good chance of winning . gets up and storms out of the room cursing loudly . gets ready to leave and follows him outside . Before leaving , admits to that the stuff said on TV actually hurt him inside . The following evening , meets with outside 's grill where they get some steak sandwiches to eat and to talk about being chosen to fight . gives $ 500 for training expenses and wishes him the best . A few hours later , , having heard about 's shot at the title goes to see at his apartment and he begins telling him about his old days as a featherweight fighter during the 1930s and all the injuries he endured . He tells that he wants to become a manager for him . tells him that he asked for help years ago but turned him down . A defeated gets ready to leave as is sitting in his bathroom . After leaves , starts shouting to Mick about his asking to help him . is half - way up the street and runs up to him and apologizes to him . Early the next morning , gets up at 4:00 a.m. and prepares for a morning run . He drinks a half - dozen raw eggs . starts his run through the streets and at the end , attempts to run up the stairs of the but ca n't reach it all the way because he 's out of shape and out of breath . Later , goes to see at the meat processing plant where he works . They talk about , with , speaking derogatorily , asks if is sleeping with his sister . becomes annoyed to the point where he admits the truth about why he ca n't talk to about giving a job working for him : Paulie talks too much . says he 's ready to leave because of the cold and the smell of the meat factory , a frustrated begins hitting a huge side of beef hanging from the ceiling , taunting . Rocky steps over and beings throwing punches into the meat , breaking the ribs . jokes at saying if he did that to he 'd be put in jail for murder . takes the meat that 's prepared him for the week and leaves . At 's apartment , Adrian cares to 's cut up hands from hitting the meat . She begins to get intimate with him but he keeps backing her off , telling her that there 's no " ' around " during training . Adrian near upset gets up and goes to the kitchen , gets up and follows her and apologizes and they embrace . begins training with and the janitor at the gym . Two girls walk in and ask for 's autograph , dismisses them harshly and tells that " women weaken legs " and to lay off " the dame " : . tells him that he really likes her , and shouts back at telling him to let her train him for women are a distraction to his training . takes a second and agrees with and will not fool around anymore . A few days later , is jogging back to his apartment building where is waiting on the steps with a surprise for him . She has purchased and given , the big from the pet shop . begins jogging around with days later . One day , and run to 's workplace to find a TV news van in the back . finds and he tells that he needs publicity but , now mad , wanted privacy . and go inside and meet with the news reporter and they ask for a demonstration on how he trains with the meat . He begins to jab at the meat as the news camera looks onto him . , 's trainer , is watching the interview and sees that means business . On , is walking home , clearly drunk . Rocky and are already there watching a movie on TV . They start talking about about what he did with the publicity stint back at the slaughterhouse . A drunken , overhearing the conversation , enters the room and threatens the both of them to leave his house . When they refuse to leave , grabs a baseball bat and threatens that he 'll break both his arms . He begins swinging at a lamp and then breaks the end table next to and . begins ranting that he never done anything wrong to and he even let him go out with his sister . then admits the truth about why he hates so much and then begins smashing more things with the bat . shouts at that she owes him , but Adrian yells back saying that it is she who takes care of . Another insulting remark by about sends her running to her room crying . Rocky angrily grabs ready to punch him , but he quickly realizes that is too drunk and weak . Rocky lets go of and walks into 's room to comfort her . She asks if he 'd like a roommate and that she is moving out of 's house . A couple of days later , is at the gym training again with and . After the session , introduces to their cut - man . gets out of the ring as and talk , and he begins hitting a heavy bag . walks in and offers an advertising job for him . tells him if he can make money off his name , do it . The famous montage of the movie starts with running around , then in the gym , hitting a speed - bag , doing push - ups and sit - ups . Then in the meat factory as hits the meat once more . Rocky then runs up the stairs of the and this time , he is able to make it all the way to the top . The next night , and are in bed at his apartment but ca n't sleep , he gets out of bed , puts his coat on and walks to the arena . stands in the center of the ring and looks around to see that the place is well decorated and ready for the fight . shows up and tells him how the stripes on his shorts are wrong in the giant painting of him but dismisses it , saying he believes is going to give the world an incredible show . goes back home as slowly awakes as lays down on the bed upset . He tells her that he wo n't be able to beat and how no one has ever gone the distance with him before . , 1976 . On the night of the fight , and are both getting prepared . When gets the cue that it 's time , he leaves down at the locker room as she wishes him good luck . starts making his way towards the ring as some of the crowd cheers for him . Among the court - side crowd is with a call - girl , as well as with another woman at his side . When he reaches the ring . , and watch as comes out dressed like as a dedication to the . He reaches the ring and dons an hat . Both fighters receive instructions and rules for the fight . They return to their corners and wait for the bell . The fight begins and begins throwing punches at but most of them miss . apparently is n't taking the fight seriously as he begins to throw a hay - maker at but he dodges it and swings at knocking him down . The crowd goes wild and gets back up and the fight continues with the two of them throwing punches at each other and dodging most of them . As the rounds progress , both and become increasingly cut - up and bruised . 's right eye is so swollen he ca n't open it . is getting tired and hurt badly with throwing punches to the body . At 14 , finally knocks down and instructs him to stay down until the count is up . comes out of the locker room and watches the ring and believes in and hopes he 'll get up . gets back up and , dancing around the ring , sees with distress that is standing and wants more . , now exhausted , throws a punch a , but ducks and jabs him twice in his right chest breaking his ribs . The bell rings signaling the end of the round and the fighters are brought back to their corners . claims he ca n't see anything and tells to cut him in order to open his eye . The bell for the 15th and final round rings , and and take their time until tags in the face . Rocky moves in as is now protecting the right side of his ribs . More punches to the faces occur on both of them until gets the last 10 seconds of the round and beats senseless and pinning him to the ropes . By this time , the whole crowd is cheering on by chanting his name over and over . The bell rings signaling the end of the fight . tells that there wo n't be a rematch and responds that he does n't want one . The ring is stormed by reporters and both the fighters managers . A reporter asks questions about the fight as shouts for . While makes her way to the ring , announces that the fight came out to be a draw and it was a split decision on who won . is allowed to retain his status at the heavyweight champion and technically wins by default . A blinded does n't seem to hear , or be bothered by , the result of the fight as he continues to shout for . makes it to ringside to see being restrained from entering the ring . Adrian sneaks in and runs to , the two embrace and declare their love for each other.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) is a young who has abandoned a privileged life at a university to enlist in the infantry , volunteering for combat duty in . The year is 1967 . Upon arrival in , , he sees dead soldiers of American soldiers in body bags being loaded into his plane . and the other recruits pass by a group of soldiers also departing on the plane who laugh at the " new guys " , but more distressing to is the shell - shocked state of a departing soldier with the " thousand - yard stare . " and several other replacements have been assigned to , division , " somewhere near the Cambodian border . " The platoon goes out on patrol in the trackless and inhospitable jungle dealing with mud , thick bushes , snakes and ants . Worn down by the exhausting work and living conditions of patrolling , 's enthusiasm for the war wanes quickly and he develops an admiration for the more experienced soldiers , despite their reluctance to extend their friendship . One day , another new arrival , platoon commander ( ) discusses the plans for a patrol later that night with the platoon sergeants : the compassionate ( ) , harsh but hard core ( ) , cowardly , sycophantic " lifer " ( ) , and drug addict ( ) . Barnes and argue over whether to send the new men out on a patrol that is likely to be ambushed . insists that the new troops go out instead of several men under him who are nearly finished with their tours of duty . Barnes agrees , only on the condition that goes out as well . That night , North Vietnamese soldiers set upon 's sleeping unit . ( ) , a fellow new recruit , is killed , and another soldier , ( ) , is maimed . Despite having passed the watch duty to ( ) , a more experienced but consistently irresponsible soldier who fell asleep , is blamed for the casualties ( is also to blame , having thrown the grenade that maimed ) . Immediately after the fighting , discovers a light wound to his neck , and he is sent to the field hospital for treatment . A few days later , returns to his unit from the hospital and , through a soldier named ( ) , gains acceptance from the " heads " , a tight - knit group led by that socializes , dances , and takes drugs in a private bunker . Next door in another bunker , leads the more traditional members of the unit whom drink beer , play cards and do n't smoke opium . becomes a more seasoned soldier as the patrols continue and soon no longer stands out among the others . During one patrol on , 1 , 1968 , the platoon finds what appears to be an abandoned bunker . explores a series of tunnels connected to the bunker . Two members of the platoon , ( ) and ( ) are killed when they stumble upon a booby trap attached to a box of documents . Shortly after , a soldier named ( ) goes missing . His mutilated body is found tied to a post close by . The platoon is infuriated by the senseless death of their comrade and are ordered to report to a nearby village of South Vietnamese citizens . The platoon reaches the village , where a food and weapons cache is discovered . The other soldiers explore the village . In one house , discovers a mute and mentally challenged teenage boy and his mother hiding in a hole beneath the floor . harasses and taunts the retarded boy by shooting his rifle at his feet , but stops himself short of killing the boy . However , ( ) takes over and beats the boy to death with his gun , even though . orders them to leave the hut . While questioning the village chief , loses his patience and senselessly kills the man 's wife despite his denials that they are aiding the . Barnes is about to murder the man 's young daughter to force him to tell them to where the enemy is when arrives at the scene and starts a fistfight with . , passive during the shooting of the wife , eventually ends the fight , and relays orders from his own superior officer to burn the village . As the men leave , a group of four soldiers , including and , drag a young Vietnamese girl into the bushes with the intention of raping her . comes upon them and stops the group from raping the girl . His comrades ridicule him for stopping them . Upon returning to base , reports ' actions to ( ) , who can not afford to remove Barnes due to a lack of personnel . However , threatens to court martial Barnes if there is evidence that he murdered an unarmed civilian . and , nervous about the possibility of an investigation , speak to and suggests " fragging " . A narrating speaks of this as " a civil war in the platoon . Half with , half with . " talks with one night and tells him that the is due for a loss in war because they 'd been mostly successful in past wars . He also confesses that he 's disillusioned with 's mission in , that he used to believe it was winnable even a few years ago , but knows now that it 's not . On their next patrol , the platoon is ambushed and pinned down in a firefight by unseen enemy soldiers . ( ) is killed and and ( ) are badly injured in the resulting skirmish . calls in wrong coordinates for artillery support , resulting in the deaths of ( ) , ( ) , and ( ) and the severe wounding of ( ) . ( ) has his leg blown off by a trip - wired booby trap while trying to escape the artillery barrage . , with , ( ) , and ( ) , go to intercept flanking enemy troops . is commanding officer , takes command . He orders the rest of the platoon to retreat to be airlifted from the area , and goes back into the jungle to find ' group . After sending , , and ( who has been shot in the lung ) back , finds . The two stare at each other for a few moments and then fires three rounds into ' chest and leaves him for dead . Barnes runs into and tells him that is dead and that he 'd seen his body nearby . Barnes orders back to the landing zone . After they take off , the men see a severely wounded emerge from the jungle , running from a large group of soldiers . He dies after being shot several more times by the while the American helicopters futilely attempt to provide him cover overhead . As they fly from the area , takes a long look at ' hardened face . At the base , tries to talk his dwindling group of six " heads " into killing in retaliation , claiming that when he 'd met in the forest after shooting , that the look on ' face told him the truth . While agrees , ( ) believes they should wait for " military justice " to decide ' fate . reminds how much he admired when he first arrived , and that is n't meant to die , noting that on several previous occasions has sustained wounds that ought to have proved mortal : " the only thing that can kill , is . " Barnes then appears , very drunk with a bottle of bourbon , having overheard calling for his murder . He enters the room , daring them to kill him . No one takes up the offer but as leaves , attacks him . Barnes quickly gets the upper hand , pins down and holds a knife to his face . urges him not to do it , telling he 'll be court - martialed and imprisoned , and he leaves after slashing under the eye . A few days later , the platoon is sent back to the ambush area in order to build and maintain heavy defensive positions against a potential attack . is promoted to , commanding the remains of ' squad . The platoon is so severely weakened , though , that there are numerous gaps in their defense . When this fact is pointed out to him , only replies that he does n't " give a fuck " any more . The troops try to prepare for the incoming battle , during which they know the majority of them will die . Just hours before nightfall , is allowed to go home as his tour of duty has come to an end . tries to use ' days for himself in order to escape the impending battle ( in which he believes he will die ) . When he asks for permission , refuses , saying , " Everybody got ta die some time , . " tries to escape the battle by spraying mosquito repellent onto his feet and passing it off as trench foot , a ploy that recognizes right away . states that he feels no remorse for the murders he has committed , saying that he enjoys , and goes on to proclaim himself to be " " , a famous and highly decorated hero . ( ) , one of the last few remaining " heads " , is assigned to the same foxhole as . That night a large attack occurs and the American defensive perimeter is broken and the camp overrun by hundreds of attacking North Vietnamese troops . and take on and cut down several attacking enemy troops until they both pause when they hear signal whistles from the unseen sergeants ordering their men to cease fire . Hearing a Vietnamese voice over a bullhorn and understanding that the are ordering RPGs up to the line to blow up the foxhole they are in , grabs and both of them crawl out of the foxhole seconds before it 's hit by an . and then attack and kill several enemy soldiers that overrun their destroyed foxhole until loses it during the fight and charges off into the carnage , shooting one enemy soldier after another . Meanwhile , the attack against the base continues relentlessly . The command bunker is destroyed by a suicide bomber ( makes a cameo as the doomed battalion commander inside the bunker ) . During the massed attack , many members of the platoon are killed , including , ( ) , , , and when their foxholes are overrun . The cowardly survives only by hiding himself under a dead body . The desperate company commander , , orders the pilots to " expend all remaining " inside his perimeter . During the chaos , and come face - to - face . As a crazed Barnes is about to beat with a shovel , the two are knocked unconscious by the last - ditch American napalm attack . A wounded regains consciousness the next morning with a serious wound to his lower abdomen caused by striking him with the sharpened edge of the shovel earlier from the night before . soon finds , who is also wounded after being shot in both legs during the battle . takes an AK-47 rifle from a dead enemy soldier and aims it at , who lays helpless on the ground . Nonetheless , feels at first not threatened , and he dismissively orders to call a medic . When does not comply , but instead continues to aim his weapon , ( deranged to the last ) dares him to pull the trigger by saying : " Do it ! " shoots three times in the chest , killing him . then drops his rifle , collapses , and awaits medical attention . Interestingly , although not in the script , is seen on the verge of pulling the pin of a grenade that he found , only to drop it as reinforcements reach him . ( thought that would be committing suicide after killing . thought that the mistake was good so he decided to keep it in the emerges from his foxhole and stabs himself in the thigh with a bayonet in order to be evacuated as a casualty . is found by other , and ( much to 's distress ) gives him command of the platoon . As he is loaded onto the helicopter , is reminded by that because they have been wounded twice , they can go home . Back at the bombed - out command post , hundreds of NVA bodies are being dumped into mass graves . After bidding farewell to , , ( ) and ( ) ( his last surviving friends in the platoon ; the other survivors are ( ) , ( ) , and ) , boards his helicopter . The helicopter flies away and weeps as he stares down at the destruction , while he ( from a future perspective ) narrates that he will forever be in , with and battling for what called " possession of his soul " , and that he believes he and other veterans must rebuild themselves , and find goodness and purpose in their > 

 < synopsis > The movie opens with a TV documentary featuring ( ) , the youngest chef in to receive a five - star rating and owner of the best restaurant in . He 's also the author of a bestselling cookbook that proudly bears his mantra , " Anyone Can rat named ( ) begins talking about his life in monologue fashion . states that he has enhanced senses of both taste and smell , which makes him very meticulous about what he eats . 's brother ( ) is impressed by this talent , but their father ( ) who leads the rats ' colony , could care less - until reveals that he can recognize the scent of rat poison in or near food . puts to work sniffing and testing food for the rest of the clan . is not happy about the rats having to steal food from the garbage ; he would prefer to go to the kitchen and take the " fresh " samples . But , who hates and fears humans , forbids ( and all other members of the clan ) to interact with them . Despite his father 's orders , spends several nights in the home of an old lady , , ( which is where the rats have colonized ) , reading 's cookbook and watching television programs about cooking . Before long he has a near - expert level of knowledge about food preparation . One day , takes into the kitchen to get some spices that will go with some other food samples they have gathered . Emile hesitates , but agrees to go with his brother . While inside , sees on TV and listens in , but he learns that a famous food critic named ( ) , known for having viciously high standards , gave 's restaurant a less - than - stellar review that resulted in the restaurant losing one of its five stars . A heartbroken died soon after , which meant the loss of another star according to tradition . While reacting to the news of 's death , accidentally wakes , who attempts to kill him and with a shotgun . They manage to evade her , but the roof of the house is shot multiple times and collapses , exposing the entire rat colony . orders everyone to evacuate but stays behind to grab 's book . The rats manage to escape on miniature rafts into a river . uses the cookbook as a flotation device but is separated from the group by a rapid current in the sewers . Hours later , sits , reading the cookbook , waiting for a sign of his friends and family . Through a fusion of grief , loneliness and hunger , begins to hallucinate that the illustration of is talking to him . Gusteau encourages to go up through the sewers and find out where he is now . travels along several pipes and finds that he is in - just in front of 's restaurant!Inside 's , the new head chef ( ) meets ( ) , the son of 's recently - deceased old flame , . gives a letter written by his mother in the hope of getting a job at the restaurant ; He is given the role of plongeur , or garbage - boy , and put to work immediately . As watches the action in the kitchen , he spots accidentally knocking over a pot of soup and trying to cover up his error by adding random ingredients . Knowing that the combination has forged will be terrible , freaks out and accidentally falls into the restaurant through the skylight . He tries to escape through an open window , but catches a whiff of the soup and , revolted by the smell , adds his own ingredients to the mixture . However , inspired by a hallucination of , continues to fix the soup , but gets caught by , who traps him underneath a bowl before he can run away and anybody else notices him . spots supposedly messing with the soup and chews him out , but he can not stop the wait staff from serving the soup . A bowl is served to a food critic , , who likes the concoction . still wants to fire , but another chef , ( ) , sticks up for , stating that firing him for making something a customer liked would go against the restaurant 's mantra and heavily affect their reputation for the worst . Skinner relents and allows to stay . makes another attempt to escape , but this time spots him and manages to catch in a jar . orders to take the rat away and kill it . takes to a river but can not bring himself to dispose of the . knows that the rat was the one who really made the soup and that will expect a duplication of the recipe . , seeing that can apparently understand him , takes the rat home and essentially adopts him . The next morning , sees that ( who he has nicknamed " " ) has apparently stolen food and bailed , but in reality has cooked breakfast for them both , which is short - lived when notices that they 're late for their first day . When they arrive at the restaurant , tries to find a way to have cook but without anyone else seeing . After a few tries , they find out that can manipulate like a puppet by pulling on the boy 's hair . Deciding that this is their best method , and spend the next few days practicing cooking in their spare time . Before long they are able to make a perfect duplicate of the soup that captured the critic 's attention . appoints to teach about the finer points of cuisine . does not relish the task at first ; she 's the only female chef , worked very hard to obtain her position and sees as a possible threat to her status . Later that night meets with an agent . We learn that since 's death , has been making a profit by selling out the name and image to a line of cheap frozen food . Taking a moment to read the letter from 's mother , panics and calls his lawyer . The lawyer ( ) explains that 's will stipulates that if no heir can be found after two years ( a deadline which expires in less than a month ) , will inherit the restaurant . Apparently the letter from 's mother states that is 's son , and should be the rightful heir ! refuses to believe it while the lawyer suggests doing a DNA test as well as a background check . begins training ( with also paying rapt attention ) about the fine art of cooking , and a rapport develops between the two . One night , a group of guests , sick of ordering 's soup time and time again , asks the head waiter ( ) about what is " new " . The staff panics , but decides to have prepare an old - style recipe for sweetbreads . knows that considered that recipe a " disaster " and hopes that it will be 's downfall . begins to follow the recipe but ( under 's manipulations ) alters it severely , which angers her . But a few minutes later , bursts in and declares that the customers love the new concoction and there are several more orders for it ! The other chefs toast 's success later that evening . , knowing about , brings into his office and pulls out a bottle of rare ' 61 in an attempt to get to talk about his " secrets " but gets nowhere . Meanwhile , resting outside , spots a mysterious figure in the garbage pails . He is stunned to find that it is his brother ! Overjoyed , runs inside to steal some ingredients to fix food for his brother . Afterwards , brings to the new colony . is overjoyed to find his second son alive , but grows furious when says he wants to leave the colony ( and return to ) . lets slip that he 's " observed " humans and has found that they 're not as bad as made them out to be , but , in an attempt to change his mind , brings to a storefront that specializes in rat - killing , stating his belief that humans and rats must always be enemies . , however , feels differently . He leaves the colony and goes back to . The next morning , finds still at the restaurant , exhausted from spending overnight cleaning . He notices pulling in and attempts to hide 's drowsiness with a pair of sunglasses . , annoyed at for seemingly using her advice to impress and get in closer with , mistakes his fatigue for snobbishness and slaps him . She confesses to a now - awake and startled that she thought he was not like the other chefs and had romantic feelings for him , and leaves in a huff . In an attempt to apologize , tries to confess his secret to , but , desperate to remain hidden , forces forward so that he ends up kissing . After a few seconds of hesitation , she reciprocates and a relationship between the two is formed . Meanwhile , is in his study when he hears news from his butler of 's renewed popularity . Stunned , he vows to return there and find out what is truly going on . 's lawyer returns to confirm 's worst fear - is indeed 's son . decides not to tell and let the will 's deadline ( a mere 3 days away ) pass - after which he can fire and suffer no ill effects . Later that night , goes out on a spin with on her motorbike , leaving behind . He finds with a few other rats outside the restaurant . is frustrated that snitched on him , and heads in to get food to keep the other rats from telling the rest of the colony . He sneaks into 's office to find the key to the food locker , and in the process finds and reads the documents describing 's parentage . tries to take the documents , but spots him escaping again . Despite a thorough chase , gets away and learns the truth . is fired , takes charge of the restaurant and the frozen - food line is halted . At a press conference a few days later , tries to explain his " genius " without exposing , much to the latter 's frustration . then walks in and introduces himself to , promising to come by the restaurant the next night to review 's once more . After the conference , vents to about how he 's inhibiting his focus and , in his growing arrogance , decides to try and work without 's help . In anger , arranges for the rest of his rat - clan to raid the restaurant that night . finds out and throws all the rats out , including , warning him not to come back or else he 'll be " treated the way restaurants are supposed to treat pests " . Remy retreats into the night , dejected . That evening , is found by near the restaurant observing 's poor leadership . then tries to grab a piece of suspiciously placed cheese , but notices that it 's a trap and gets caught trying to save him . It turns out that the trap was set by , who wants to work for him creating new frozen foods . arrives at the restaurant , and instead of ordering off the menu he challenges the chef to " hit [ him ] with your best shot . " , eager to see the downfall of , asks to have the same dish that is served . , still caged , is freed by his father and brother . Thankful , he returns to the restaurant to help . The chefs spot him returning and try to kill him , but steps in and protects , confessing the truth to everyone . The chefs , stunned , walk out - even . retreats to his office believing there to be no hope for Gusteau's . comes in and admits that he was wrong ; seeing stand up for has changed his attitude about humans . recruits the entire rat colony to help out - they will follow 's orders to prepare the food . Just then , a health inspector arrives and sees the kitchen full of rats . A group of rats led by swarms the inspector , tying him up and locking him in the pantry . Before long , after a thorough cleaning in the kitchen 's dishwasher , the rats form an intricate system under 's supervision and are preparing all the meals for the restaurant . , knowing that someone will have to wait tables , puts on a pair of roller skates and begins serving the guests . , having had a change of heart , returns to the restaurant to help and . She asks what wants to prepare for . selects , an older - style recipe not traditionally up to the standards of 's ( calls it a " peasant dish . " ) Soon enough , the entre is prepared and served to . takes a bite of the ratatouille , and immediately has a flashback to his childhood where his mother prepared the same dish to brighten his spirits after a bicycle accident . He is overwhelmed with emotion for the dish . , furious , storms into the kitchen - and is tied up and thrown into the pantry alongside the health inspector . 's heart is warmed by the fantastic meal and insists on thanking the chef , but is told that he must wait until all other customers have left . That evening , learns the whole truth from , and . After leaving the restaurant , writes a fantastic review for 's - proclaiming the chef to be " the finest in " , while neglecting to reveal the chef 's true identity . Unfortunately , the good fortune does not last . The health inspector and are eventually freed , and word gets out about the inner workings of the kitchen which leads to 's being shut down . loses his job and a great deal of credibility for promoting a rat - infested restaurant . , telling this story to his family and a few friends , states that is now working as a small - business investor . It seems that ( along with , and ) has opened a bistro named " " where humans and rats ( in a hidden , separate chamber ) are both welcome , and 's legacy lives > 

 < synopsis > The opening shot shows the text : BASED , , 1976At a police station , an older cop tells a younger one that the woman is hysterical , that she is divorced with four kids and that was helping out . In an interview room , the is talking to a distraught woman fingering rosary beads while her three children color with crayons . The young cop is told nobody can discuss this case with the papers and that the case is n't going to be arraigned . . , 2001It is the newsroom . A reporter named is retiring to be replaced by a new editor . ( ) gives a playful speech about his departure . Another reporter , ( ) carries a piece of cake downstairs to the department , a small office with only two others on staff -- ( ) and ( ) . They are the investigative team for the , all working so hard on a story , they have to eat the cake for their lunch . They mention how sad it is to see go to a bigger paper and mention many others are leaving the company . The new boss that is coming on is said to have cut a lot of people from the paper he ran in ; they worry he 's going to phase out Spotlight . Nobody has met him yet but is going to have lunch with him . We cut to that lunch meeting . ( ) is reading ' The of the ' while he waits for . When suggests check out a game , explains he 's actually not a baseball fan but just trying to get a feel for his new city . He asks about , which explains is a four - person team that does investigative that reports to They just finished a story on a negligent construction site and are looking for a new story . asks how long it takes and says it can take weeks or up to a year because they do n't like to rush things . asks what they are working on now but tells him all their investigation has been on their new editor since everyone is concerned about losing their job . notes this is understandable as the Internet is making classifieds obsolete and they 're losing revenue . asks if this is why he asked about but tells him he had another reason . The next day , attends a 10:30 AM meeting where is first introduced to the staff . He asks them if they 've read 's column about the case . They 're only vaguely familiar so he tells them it 's about a Catholic priest that molested many children in six different parishes over the last 30 years . The lawyer for the victims , , said that found out about it 15 years earlier and did nothing . The cardinal denies this but the lawyer claims he has documents to prove it . He says they should write a story on this since it 's only been in their paper twice in the last six months . points out the documents are sealed but tells him they can take the church to court for access . confirms that he is suggesting they sue the . says technically all they 're doing is filing a motion to lift the seals on this documents . points out everyone will still consider this suing the church . is n't worried . In 's office , and update on 's suggestion to sue for the sealed documents in the case . , who has written the article , gives them the lowdown on the people involved . The judge on the case is Catholic so they are n't hopeful she will rule in their favor . suggests Spotlight take the story since it 's now an investigative report . tells the group about their new story -- not just the case but that knew about the allegations and covered it up to protect the corrupt and the 's reputation . They decide to investigate , as well as , the lawyer for the victims of molestation by another priest a decade earlier . decides to meet with , who 's reaping the current victims . He 's told he is a personality which does n't faze ... he likes personalities . The next day , is kept waiting when he goes to 's office . He is ignored . and visit ( ) , a handsome lawyer . They ask if 's been following the case and he mentions the 80 plaintiffs with all individual cases ( not a class action suit ) . points out the molestation cases are " all shitty " because the statute of limitation is only three years and most victims do n't come forward until they 're adults -- because of shame and guilt and they come from tough neighborhoods where they do n't want other kids to know they were molested . And the charitable immunity statute caps damages at $ 20,000 , which astonishes . says they should try the cases through the press , like he did years earlier . But he adds that most of the victims are afraid to be publicly interviewed -- he knows because he represented some of the victims . tells them that his settling of the cases resulted in nothing more than acknowledgment of their victimhood by the and a few thousand dollars . He suggests does n't really have sealed documents -- he 's just bluffing to get a better deal . They think that would be risky but he believes would do that and asks if they 've met him . We now meet ( ) when sneaks into his office as a client leaves . reminds him of their appointment but tries to blow him off , telling him the is writing an article on him . tells him he 's following up on the article wrote about his suit he is told there are 86 individual suits , it 's not one large one . tells him he ca n't show him the documents because they 're under seal . The church is trying to get him disbarred and he does n't want to be speaking to or to be on the record in any shape , even handwritten notes . tells him he 's already talked to the but tells him nobody reads the but the still has power . If they cover the story , it will be read by everyone -- they 're just as powerful as the . asks if he can interview some of the victims . Garabedian tells him he needs to think about it and to call him tomorrow . At the , meets with and tells him about challenging the protective order in the case . points out that their subscriber base is a majority Catholic but okays the lawsuit . Down in the office , a woman brings clippings on past reports regarding the case . mentions an organization for survivors of priest molestation called ( of those Abused by Priests ) . It 's run by a man named . finds a clip from their column that mentions another priest molesting kids in and then being moved to where he did the same thing . It was n't who swept it under the rug -- it was another cardinal . They now see a pattern that when these men are found molesting kids , they are quickly moved to another parish . The article mentions , a friend of 's , defended the priest . meets with and his wife for dinner . He asks about the priest that represented and whether the cardinals covered it up . says he ca n't talk about the case , even off the record . attends church with her very Catholic grandmother , a bit torn now that she 's learning more about the cardinal covering up the molestations . She looks at all the young children singing in the choir and is unnerved . At the , continues trying to reach out to . meets with who says he looks forward to working with the . When tells him , they are best to perform without the church 's influence , the mentions how another paper lost a lot of subscribers when the church disagreed with their stance on a topic . A secretary comes in and gives a gift -- ' The of the . ' ( is Jewish.)The team meets with , who runs . He tells them when he was 11 , he was preyed upon by a priest . He asks if any of them are Catholic . They all were raised Catholic but none of them are very religious now . tells them , " When a parish priest pays attention to you , it 's a big deal . It 's like asking you for help . So one day , when he asks for a hand job , you give it to him . This is not just physical abuse but spiritual abuse because it robs you of your faith . You 're ashamed and many end up becoming alcoholics or drug addicts or killing themselves -- hence why the organization is for survivors . tells them about a book written on a case in and suggests talking to , a former priest who worked at a treatment center , where priests are sent when they get caught . He tells them he sent all this information to the about five years ago and they never ran the story . He was shocked because the story was big -- not just but the whole country , even up to the . He knows of at least eight Catholic priests in alone who have molested children . and join at a baseball game with and a reporter . They mention meeting with . and the reporter know him because he sent hundreds of letters to their staff and they consider him not a reliable source . The next day , returns to meet with who tells that he spoke with his clients and they do n't want to be in the press . explains this is n't for a profile piece but for a Spotlight story much bigger , that will be on the front page . This catches 's attention who tells him to come back later that week . and meet with and wonder about his credibility . He points out that he 's being smeared for speaking out against the and complains that they never took him seriously before . They mention they have a new editor taking the story seriously and that himself is now involved and he was n't before . is convinced and decides to connect them with some of the survivors . meets with a heavy , effeminate man named at a cafe ; he is very sweet but nervous . Meanwhile , meets with one of 's clients at his office , . He is a handsome , masculine father who explains that his dad killed himself and his mom was schizophrenic . He tells them he does n't want his name published . The two interviews are intercut simultaneously . was sent to a group for kids from troubled families by a nun , led by the priest who raped him . was taken in by the priest after he lost his father . The priest took him to go get ice cream , which excited him . But on the drive home , he started touching through his pants which scared him but he could n't do anything because it was a priest . He mentions that he never even touched his ice cream ; it just melted down his arm . told him his priest knew he was gay and showed him a mobile over a baby 's crib with different words like homosexual , transsexual , and bisexual on it . Being attracted to men and being forced into sex at an early age really affected him . His mother found out about it years later and complained about the incident to the cardinal who responded by moving the priest to another parish . asks if his mother ever hired a lawyer but he said he only went to a lawyer for the first time a few years ago and was told he could only get a small settlement . asks who the lawyer was but he ca nt remember the name , only that he was handsome . then realizes the lawyer was , whom they met with earlier . Finishing his interview , is now determined to expose priests who molest kids and says they can use his name if they want . Back at the , everybody compares notes . realizes has settled cases with a bunch of priests . They now have a list of four priests in the city who have molested kids . gets in contact with , the former priest , on the phone . He is told it 's not just a few bad apples molesting kids but that it is a psychiatric phenomenon . explains to later what he was told -- they all target kids from low income families with absentee fathers , in need of attention . They do n't target boys because they 're gay but because their actual sexuality has no basis on molesting kids ; it 's a form of power control . has learned of dozens of molesting priests over the years but when he went public , the church smeared him . and make their way to the basement where has pulled the annual directories listing all the priests in . The directories show where every priest is in a given year -- in one directory , is listed as being on sick leave . They check the ' 91 directory for the year another priest was accused of molestation . He is also listed as being on sick leave . They realize it 's an official designation by the church when someone is being moved after being caught molesting kids . Upstairs , they look through the directories and see " emergency response " and " sick leave " listed for all the molesting priests they know about . is visited in his office by a critic who tells him that reporting on the church story could lose them a lot of subscribers . realizes this is why he was invited to a . and meet with again who wo n't talk about the cases he settled against the priest that molested , the effeminate victim met with . They mention other cases and asks why there are n't any records . tells them he dealt directly with the church , that it was a private mediation . Back in the office , realizes there 's no paper trail because the victim had to sign a confidentiality agreement to get the settlement . Everything was done under the table and the lawyer gets his fee from the church who then maintains their clean image by washing the crime clean . Because was confirmed to have defended the priests that molested the victims they were connected to through , it gives him credibility . They 're now looking at seven or eight priests they can discuss in their story . and attend a gala run by the . was invited by a friend from the high school he went to , which is across the street from the . They are surrounded by powerful people in the and meet two of them , and . tells that when they were investigating one of the priests a decade earlier , called down the wrath of on them and one of their editors broke his leg skiing days later . , the lawyer who defended priests in the past , greets at the bar . mentions how admitted to settling cases with the out of court , quietly , with cash and a handshake . asks how many priests has represented but says he ca n't answer that because it 's unethical . tells that he should want to be on the right side of this . On the same night , meets with for dinner and is told that one of his clients filed a criminal complaint but the stepped in to protect , using their friends like . Garabedian mentions it took an outsider at the -- , the new Jewish editor -- to break a story . He tells that it takes a village to raise a child and it takes a village to abuse one . At the the next day , realizes there are several of the same terms that the directories uses when a priest is inexplicably removed from his parish . , the former priest , calls in and puts him on speakerphone . tells them that only 50 % of the Catholic clergy practice celibacy , which creates a culture of secrecy -- covering up sex between consensual adults which extends over to covering up pedophiles . He continues , telling them that in 1985 , a secretary warned that pedophile priests would be a billion dollar liability for the . estimates that 6 % of all Catholic priests molest minors out of sexual frustration because of their enforced celibacy as well as their secret shame of being homosexual or being a pedophile . Out of the 1,500 priests in , that means at least 90 priests would be molesting kids . suggests they use the directories to look up any priests listed as being on " sick leave " or " absent on leave " or " unassigned"--code for priests being sent to church - run treatment centers . These same priests are moved from to parish every few years . The reporters all begin working on compiling a list of names with these designations . The entire team works tirelessly on scanning the directories . At home , realizes one of the " treatment centers " is a house around the corner from his home . He goes outside and stares at the house , flabbergasted . He puts a sign on his refrigerator telling his kids to stay away from the house and the men who live there . At the office , they 've finally compiled all their data into a spreadsheet . They have a list of 87 priests that the directory seems to suggest are molesting kids , right in line with the six percent of priests that suggested . calls and asks him if there are as many as 90 priests that have been caught molesting kids in . tells him he has to stop this . enters 's office and tells him that he discovered some of the molesters living near his home and asked him whether he can tell the neighbors about their findings . tells him they 'll tell them soon . meets with , telling him he has a list of 87 priests that are potential child molesters . He needs to know which ones has settled cases for ( to verify their crimes since the directories are circumstantial ) . threatens that there are two stories -- one about the clergy covering for priests and the other about lawyers who spent ten years profiting off of sex scandals , never going public with the dozens of priests that were molesting young boys and girls . agrees to help but says that he actually told the about it years earlier and they buried the story . At the , gets new clips and finds something very interesting -- a clip that confirms that did give them a heads up years earlier . At the , reveals that has shared a list of 46 priests he represented , along with some victims ' names . Some of the victims of the eight they were told about by have agreed to go on record . is concerned about , referencing 's story about how he called down the wrath of after their past report . He wonders why he had such an extreme reaction when they reported on a single priest in the 1990s , given that the priest was elsewhere in . suggests had to know there were others and it was a bigger story -- even bigger than 50 priests . They suspect that the manipulated the system so the priests would n't face charges ; that reporting on the molestations wo n't get a public reaction ( they seem like isolated incidents ) but showing that the cover - ups came from the top will . pulls and in his office . He is worried that is going to bully them if they run a story , which could tank their paper . They have to take down in a way that he wo n't be able to recover from and he wo n't be able to smear them . That night , is leaving and shares with the clip that she found , confirming 's story . looks it over but has no response . The entire group begins to investigate policemen who were involved in the arresting of the priests and how the church covered it up with bribes and/or intimidation ( including the cop on duty in the film 's opener ) . Back at the office , asks if he knows of a at . He remembers him from when he went there . He is given a printout about him . is in court watching the case the is filing against the church to unseal documents . The Catholic judge seems antagonistic to the . The church 's lawyer accuses them of just wanting to sell papers and just wants to help his cases . Outside , tells that a priest discovered was molesting boys in 1962 but when he told the , he was threatened into silence . Then , 30 years later , when he read about molesting hundreds of boys , he felt guilty and called , who asked the priest to come in and sit for a deposition on having given the church a heads up . But when he showed up , he was with the same lawyer attacking the in court that day . Now the priest states he has a foggy memory and negates his claim that he told his superiors . A year earlier , found an article from a local paper , revealing the priest finally went to the press to tell them about being silenced by officials in the 1960 's . Now that he had him on record , he has a good reason to talk to him again . But when he filed a motion to depose him , the church 's lawyer filed a motion opposing his motion . However , this allowed to make an argument why he should be allowed to depose the priest and he 's able to present the documents that have been sealed earlier . These 14 documents prove everything -- about the church , the bishops , and now it 's all public , in his case . But if goes into a courtroom and tries to retrieve them , he 'll find they are missing because the had them removed . Garabedian tells to check the docket . does and sure enough , the exhibits folder is empty . calls and tells him about the documents . He says that if the 's lawyer files a motion ( for the lawsuit against the church ) , the judge will order to refile the documents . The next morning , everyone is gathered around a TV . It is 11 , 2001 and they are watching the terrorist attacks in and unfold on the news . Later , is on TV , giving a speech about praying for the nation . orders the team to stop their story so they can focus on 9/11 -- the only story that could derail them from their larger investigation . is sent away to to investigate the flight school that trained the pilot of the first plane that crashed into the . He calls Garabedian and begs him not to refile the documents until he returns . Once he does , they 'll be public record and another newspaper can break the story without all of the information they 've uncovered . Garabedian says he ca n't make any promises . meets with to tell him they 've been taken off the story because the country needs the church at this time . points out he needed the church at one point and that a lot of people relived painful experiences in an effort to expose the crimes . He threatens to take the story to the . calms him down by telling him they 're not abandoning the story , she 's met with too many survivors and their families to not tell the story -- but they need to tell it right and need a few more weeks . This calms down . In , gets a call from who tells him that refiled the docs . He is then told has been put back on the story because of this ; flies back to that afternoon . visits the high school he went to and talks to the principal about the seven victims that have come forth about being molested by there . It is clear to that the in charge must have known about the crimes because of how tightly run everything was . and , who met at the Catholic gala , are there , defending the school . But the schools says that if he was on board at the time , he would have done something . He admits that they must have known since they sent out of town after he was caught . is told by that the presidents statement is off the record . Outside , points out to that both of them were athletes while was a coach at the school . They escaped molestation by pure luck . notes that the is directly across the street from where these crimes took place . gets to the courthouse and tries to get the documents . The clerk is standoffish and asks him if he knows what 's he 's retrieving . He is then told because of their sensitive nature , he must meet with a judge upstairs . He rushes up there and is given permission . When he gets back down and finally gets the documents , he 's told he ca n't take them out of the building . He says he 's going to make copies but is told the copy room closed at 4 PM . He then gives the clerk $ 83 in his pocket in exchange for using their personal copier . The documents reveal the church knew about the molestations based on letters written to and how he demanded the victims ' families keep silent . Another letter is from an auxiliary bishop who broke ranks , acknowledging has a history of homosexual involvement with young boys , in an attempt to find some solution beyond a mild punishment of weekend work . wants to write up the story but tells him to hold off -- that there are 90 other cases out there and they need to get more evidence corroborating them to tell the bigger story . is furious , worried that the is going to steal the story before them and butcher it -- he is adamant that they nail the scumbags and they need to print the story to show the that they ca n't get away with what they 've done . finds at home . He asks her if she 's ever thought of going back to church . She says she has attended with her grandmother but it 's hard with all the things they now know . mentions , growing up , it 's hard to abandon it completely but after reading those letters , his faith collapsed . meets up with in a hotel bar . complains about and says running the story will lose them subscribers . He tells he does n't want his career to be ended and him forever to be known as the guy who brought down the . He writes the entire story off as being just a few bad apples . realizes this is how the operates they have one guy lean on someone and the entire town looks the other way . At the office the next day , is told that ruled in favor of the to unseal the documents . The church has filed an appeal but the trial court is almost always upheld in manners like this . The documents will probably be released in , around the time 's trial begins . and the editor want to make their success against the a big story , focusing on a first amendment victory , but does n't want to alert the of the story . and now tell and how some of the documents have already become public due to slipping them into a public motion ; these documents prove knew about the molestations in the 80s . is upset that they did n't release the story but tells him that the church covering up molestation has been going on for decades , even before , and the court covered it up . They think they can write everything up in two weeks but suspect it will be a poor move to publish the story during the first season after 11th . They decide to run it right after 2002 , shortly before the trial begins . now tells the editor to bury the 's victory over the church in the section . The Spotlight team steps up their story . begins writing . The team continues meeting with victims , priests , judges . The wife of a priest yells at when she asks to speak with him . The sister of a victim is also hostile . But also gets to speak to someone who is happy to talk . The team is getting quotes from various sources . Robby visits at his house , led in by 's wife . tells they 're running out of time . He tells him they 've got the cover - up stories of 75 priests but they need a solid confirmation from him because he represented them . He tells he has to choose what side he 's on . tells he s out of line but responds that the entire city is out of line lawyers , politicians , cops . Everybody is looking the other way but can put an end to it . gets riled up , says that he defended the scumbags but it was his job to . He points out the had a lot of information that could have alerted them to the story but they never did any investigating so they 're just as guilty as everyone else . kicks out of his home . But as he walks to his car , runs to him , still angry , but asks for the list . reads it over and then circles every single name , verifying them as clients he once represented . Through , is able to make an offer to to defend himself in the in a full page , unedited response . But later , he visits and to tell them that turned the offer down and the Archdiocese spokeswoman says they do n't even want to know what the questions are . This gives them enough of a quote for their story The church had no interest in knowing what the Globes questions would be . wonders about manning the phones come morning given all the attention the story will get ; tells him and will be there working on a piece and they 'll have a tip line listed where people can call with more information . wants to hire extra staff to man the phones at reception , remembering the protests from the last story about a molesting priest . He 's also concerned about picketers and angry letters . mentions confirming all the priests they suspected as being involved . He has been rattled by 's comment that the should have caught it sooner . tells him the story needed since no singular reporter could have broken it . But is still upset he was one of the reporters in the department that ran the story years earlier ( i.e. the clip that gave to him ) and he never thought to investigate it further . tells them all to forgive their past sins because they need to prepare for Laws backlash after the story is published . As hard as they 've worked over the last six months , they 're going to have to work even harder from this point on . The team leaves for the night , content with all of their work . stops by 's office and gives him an early look at the paper . When he leaves , he sees a mother and two children in a waiting room ; the mother is fingering rosary beads . Its a callback to the opening scene at the police station with a mother in a waiting room with her kids . Garabedian tells that both boys were abused weeks earlier and encourages to keep doing his work . calls about the story . asks him how he s able to continue to believe in something after all he knows . says he still needs his faith ; the church is an institution of men and even well - meaning men fail . The papers are printed , come off the presses , are transported around the city by trucks . They end up on doorsteps , in living rooms . The headline on the front page by for . takes a copy of the paper and drops it on the doorstep of the house where the molesting priest lives . morning , is looking out his window . He notes that there are n't any protesters . His colleague suggests they 're still at church . finds in the parking lot , even though its their day off . They want to go inside and get a sense of the response they 're getting . Inside , the main receptionist is bored , saying its the easiest overtime she 's made because nobody is calling their phone lines . She mentions that she had to send people down in the office to help out and . and rush down to the office . Phones are ringing off the hook . After getting off a call , tells them they 're getting tons of response , almost all positive and many from victims who have more tips . suggests and help out . answers a phone . The ending titles indicate that the cover - ups were revealed to have extended far beyond which led all the way to . Hundreds of cities as listed as having similar scandals . Then dozens of countries are listed ( , , , , , , , , etc ) , as well , where the abuse also extended to.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > Over an apocalyptic battlefield in the year 2029 , the ruins of the city of are dominated by robotic war machines , some like tanks , others are hover - crafts , a title card tells us that in the future , humans will wage a long war against an enemy known as the . The " final battle " however , will not be fought in this future world , but in the past , specifically our present ... tonight . The year switches to , 12 , 1984 at 1:34 am . At the overlooking the city , lightning emanates from above a garbage truck , knocking out power . The driver sees a naked and heavily muscular man ( ) . The man stands up and starts walking toward the city where he is spotted by three young punks . The man gives several indifferent answers to a series of sarcastic questions they punks ask him and then orders the men to give him their clothes . The punks produce knives in response . The man swats two punks aside , the third stabs him , but the man impossibly tears open the punk 's body with his bare hands , and kills him . The third punk , seemingly the only one left alive , immediately begins to remove his coat . In a downtown alley , a homeless man sees a bright , circular light just above the ground , similar to the one at . A scarred , naked man , muscular but much smaller in size than the other man who arrived in a similar fashion , is forced through the portal and lands in the alley , in obvious pain . This is ( ) . takes the homeless man 's pants , just as a police car pulls up and two cops yell at him to freeze . is able to hide and attacks one of the cops , taking his pistol and demanding the cop tell him the date and year . The cop becomes puzzled by 's question . When the cop 's partner arrives , Reese runs into a department store . He steals several items , including a pair of sneakers and a long coat and escapes the store . In another alley outside , he steals a shotgun from an unoccupied squad car . Finding a phone book nearby , he looks up the name " . "Elsewhere a young woman , ( ) , lives the life of a lonely waitress . Sharing an apartment with her friend ( ) , is living out a boring life that seems to go nowhere . The muscular man steals a car and goes to a local sporting goods store where he has the owner ( ) show him several assault weapons and a pistol with laser sighting . He flatly asks for a " phased - plasma rifle " ; the owner tells him " Only what you see , pal " . The owner tells his customer that he can take the rifles right away but the pistol has a waiting period . As he explains the process , the man casually loads the shotgun and shoots the clerk . Shortly after , the man finds a phone book and looks for the name " " finding three listings in the area . He goes to the address of the first listing ; as he walks to the front door , a small dog barks at him . When this opens the door and acknowledges her name , the man forces his way inside and shoots her with the pistol he acquired . Not long after , at the diner where she works , 's co - worker drags her to the television where she sees a news report about a woman sharing her name having been murdered by an unidentified assailant . That evening , and her roommate , , prepare for separate dates . 's boyfriend , ( ) , will be coming over to spend the night . gets a message from her date , who cancels . decides to go out for pizza and sees another news report where the police announce the death of another woman sharing her name . becomes worried , and when she sees she is being followed ( by ) , she ducks into a small dance club called . She tries to call , however and do not hear the phone as they are having sex . Not long after 's call , the killer attacks and fatally shoots and , before hearing 's voice on their answering machine saying where she is . then phones the police department and is connected to ( ) and ( ) , the detectives investigating the killings . tells to stay put until he can get a squad car to her . The killer arrives at the club , dispatches a bouncer , and wades into the crowd . In the meantime , has also entered the dance club . is finally spotted by the killer , which aims its laser - sighted pistol at her . Reese fires on the killer , hitting him with several blasts , and knocking him to the floor . sees the killer impossibly rise to its feet and open fire on with the it stole . He advances on again , shooting the woman behind her , the woman 's body pinning her to the floor . As the killer advances on her and prepares to shoot her , appears again and hits the killer with several more shotgun blasts , blasting him out the front window of the club where he lands on the street . He tells " Come with me if you wanna live " as the killer arises again and chases them out the back of the club . Reese and run through an alley behind the club as the killer chases them . From the killer 's perspective , we see that he is a robot of some kind who sees them through a computerized form of night vision . Reese blasts the gas tank of a nearby car which explodes . The killer is unfazed , and jumps on the hood of 's car , smashing its fist through the windshield and grasping at . Reese maneuvers his car in reverse and throws the killer off . Reese speeds off while the subdues a cop ( screenwriter ) and takes his squad car . During the chase , the killer listens closely to the police reports on the car 's radio and responds in the cop 's voice . During the chase , frantically identifies himself as a sergeant with a serial number and explains that has " been targeted for termination " and that the killer chasing them is not a man but a machine called a " terminator " ; a metallic combat chassis covered with living human tissue to make it appear human . They race through several alleys , finally stopping in a parking garage . tells that the first and larger 600 had rubber skin , but the newer 800 are very hard to identify which is why he followed and waited for the to make its move so he could identify it . Incredulous , panics and begins to scream for help , biting on the hand . He tells her not to do it again . In the parking garage , they leave behind 's car and find another unlocked one . explains further that a nuclear war will be initiated by a new , powerful computer system ( referred to as " " in the first sequel ) that is going to be tasked with controlling all defense systems . Reese himself has not seen the ensuing nuclear holocaust but was born and grew up destitute and starving in the ruins . He was enslaved and marked with a bar - code and was forced to work loading bodies into incinerators . The human race , he says , will be on the verge of extinction when one man , , is able to organize the remaining humans into an effective resistance movement that , by the time will be sent back to the present day by himself , had actually defeated . is 's future son . In desperation , has sent the to the present day to murder and eliminate 's existence . also explains that the pursuing , is a new model , one that appears infinitely more human than its predecessors . tells her the android will bleed , sweat and even has bad breath to enhance the disguise . is uncertain that he can defeat the android without having the advanced weaponry of the future . The finds them there and the chase resumes . has take over driving and is able to hit the with a few blasts from his shotgun . stops their car and the crashes into a wall . As the police close in , is ready to shoot at them but stops him , saying they 'll kill him . When she and are arrested , she sees that the has escaped the scene . At 's police precinct , is told that is dead and that has been given to a criminal psychiatrist , ( ) . His story about the is treated as the babbling of extreme delusion . While watching the videotape of the interview , eagerly says that a case like 's could be career - making . During the interview , asks why he did n't bring weaponry from the future with him , to which replies that only living material will go through the time portal . quickly becomes agitated and begins to scream into the camera that the must be destroyed or it will not stop until it kills . The goes back to a shoddy hotel room where it hides out . It removes one of its eyes that had been damaged when it was shot by . Under the human eye is a sophisticated robotic eye that glows red . It dons a set of sunglasses , changes into different clothes and marches out to resume the hunt for , taking a pump - action SPAS shotgun and an AR-18 automatic rifle . At the police precinct , the arrives in the foyer just as is leaving and asks to see . The desk sergeant refuses to let the in . The looks menacingly at the desk sergeant , then up and around and simply states " I 'll be back . " The goes outside and one minute later crashes a car through the front door . It marches through the precinct , ruthlessly shooting every officer in its path . The gets to a circuit panel and after ripping out a main circuit cable , shoves the live wire into the fuse box creating an electrical surge that blows out all lights in the building , leaving the policemen at a disadvantage . In the battle , and are hit by gunfire and escapes confinement . He finds and the two escape the precinct . While hiding out in a sewer tunnel , realizes that 's story is true . tells her more about the future where humans barely survive amid the wreckage of cities and the predating of the . Initially , 's vehicles , " hunter - killers " or , would use infrared technology to find and kill humans . Kyle mentions that 's talent for strategy helped the to defeat them . Later , the new Terminators , " infiltrators " like the one he and are on the run from , appeared and began to find hidden bunkers where humans hid out . lapses into sleep and has a nightmare of a firefight where Terminators break into a human sanctuary and massacre scores of civilians . himself is there ; after finding a place to rest after a patrol , he takes out a photo of and admires it . Alerted by dogs ( who can sense a ) at the entrance to the bunker , joins the valiant fight to destroy a that has gotten in . The , carrying a heavy plasma gun , slaughters everyone and causes an explosion that cripples Reese . sees the picture of being burned nearby . Meanwhile , the is back in its seedy motel room hideout looking at an address book that it took from and 's apartment and sees a list of names including that of 's mother who lives upstate . After harshly dismissing the hotel owner , the then leaves its room and gets on a stolen motorcycle and takes off on the road . Later , the two reach a roadside motel , where goes to purchase chemicals needed to make explosives . While he is shopping ( using " borrowed " money ) showers and phones her mother , telling her the phone number where she is , unaware that the is on the other line and recreating the voice of 's mother . 's mother is nowhere in sight , but the appearance of the cabin 's knocked down front door with a large shotgun blast hole in it suggests that the forced its way in and probably shot 's mother and waited for to call . The then phones the motel and , using its real voice , asks the desk clerk to give him the motel 's address . At the motel , Reese returns with a bag full of unusually matched items like ammonia and corn syrup . and make a stockpile of pipe bombs filled with plastique , a compound that had learned to make and teaches to make as well , also showing her the cautious process involved to make the bombs . When asks if he has ever had a lover , he replies he has not , a fact that touches . then mentions having a photo of and how he has fallen in love with her . Realizing he has gone too far , he furiously begins loading explosives , but stops him and kisses him . The two lose their inhibitions and have sex . Their consummation results in the conception of 's ( and 's ) son , . That evening , the tracks them to the motel and the two flee again in a stolen pickup truck ( alerted by a tenant 's pet dog barking at the sight of the approaching ) . As they race down a wide highway , makes a valiant effort to destroy the with the pipe bombs he and made , however , he is hit by gunfire . manages to knock the off its motorcycle and her truck flips over . The recovers and is immediately struck by a semi - tanker truck and dragged for a short distance . After the driver stops , the kills him and takes control of the truck , ( ordering the truck driver 's partner to " Get out ! " ) attempting to run down . is able to get out of their wrecked pickup before the runs it down . Near a factory , uses another pipe bomb to detonate the truck 's tank trailer , which explodes . As Reese and embrace , the emerges from the wreckage , its flesh completely burned off . Reese and retreat into the factory , which is automated . Reese switches on as many of the machines as he can , making tracking more difficult for the . They are finally cornered and Reese places his last bomb in the endoskeleton of the , which explodes , scattering pieces of the android . , nursing a severely injured leg , finds , but he 's dead . She is suddenly attacked by the top half of the 's skeleton . She desperately crawls away , finally luring the into a giant hydraulic press . She traps it there and , as it mindlessly tries to break her neck , pushes the button activating the press . The is crushed until its red glowing eye fades . is taken to an ambulance and sees the paramedics loading into a body bag . Later , she is driving a Jeep in the desert , a large dog in the passenger seat , seemingly towards , stopping at a gas station . She is more visibly pregnant with and has been recording her voice using a cassette player ; the tapes are for her son . One of the questions she poses is whether or not she should tell about being his father and if that will affect his decision to send the warrior back in time to meet and save . While the 's tank is filled , a young boy takes her picture with a camera ( it is the same picture that will give in the future ) . She and the boy bargain over the price and she buys it . The boy says something in and the gas station owner tells her he said that a storm is coming but she is aware of this . sees the storm approaching and she drives off into an unknown future . The ending credits roll.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The theatrical release of was preceded by the short film : No ( 2017).Logan ( ) , formerly the , wakes up in the back of a limo , groggy and disheveled . It 's the middle of the night . He stumbles out and finds a Mexican gang trying to steal the limo 's wheels . calmly attempts to intervene but one of the gang members blasts him with a shotgun . Standing up , reveals his claws , an act that is evidently painful , but one does n't extend all the way . He fights the gang , receiving his share of abuse as they beat him down , but manages to brutally maim and kill most of them before the rest run away . The year is 2029 . Looking no older than 50 , has still aged to over 170 years and is no longer the same fighter he once was . His superhuman healing ability is failing and the adamantium in his body is slowly killing him . As a result , his body aches and he coughs up blood on occasion . Mutants are on the brink of extinction and no new ones have been born in 25 years . now makes a living driving for a limo service in , under his birth name , . He also carries an adamantium bullet with him in case he ever decides to end it all . While he waits for a client at a funeral , he is approached by a woman named ( ) . She claims to know who he is and asks for his help , but turns her away . drives off as a young girl in the back seat stares at . One morning a man enters 's limo , introducing himself as ( ) . He appears to know much about , saying he 's aware of his unofficial participation in the killing of the gang members and alludes to 's side job as caretaker for one just south of the border . says he knows was contacted by a person of interest and claims that he only wants what has ; something she took from him . He hands a card and tells him to call when he finds again . The card reads that is head of security at ' - , a biotechnological corporation . drives off , furious . heads into to an abandoned plant where he and the clairvoyant mutant ( ) , an albino psychic , are taking care of ( ) . has been reduced to a shell of his former self , crippled and suffering from a degenerative brain disease which produces seizures . Thanks to his mutation , the seizures produce staggering psionic blasts which paralyze anyone within reach . must administer a special serum to keep 's episodes under control , though the doses often leave him confused and senile . has become broken since the loss of his school and fellow X - Men some time ago and says that is just waiting for him to die . argues with about obtaining enough medicine for . explains that it 's hard caring for , especially when wo n't communicate about his own needs which are more than evident to the albino . storms off . Later he receives a notification for two passengers and drives to a motel . There , he comes across again with the young girl whom says is her 11 year old daughter , ( ) . She offers $ 50,000 to help them reach a place called ' ' in en route to before handing him an envelope with coordinates written on it and $ 20,000 inside . reluctantly agrees and heads home to prepare . There , he tells that their dream of leaving and buying a boat may actually become reality . However , when he returns to the motel , he finds that has been murdered and is missing . takes 's cell phone and finds she was in the process of sending him a text telling him to hurry as they 've been found . returns home , dejected , but is stunned to find that has stowed away in the trunk of his limo . excitedly hosts the young girl and tries to convince that she needs their help . However , correctly predicts that she 'll be found and , soon enough , comes knocking at their door . claims is not there and , when persists , throws a pipe at his head , knocking him out . tells to take out into the desert and leave him there . Caliban dresses heavily to protect his sensitive skin from the sun and carts 's body away , but a squad of elites from , the , arrive . They pick up and capture . The return to the plant and two enter to retrieve , who is calmly eating a bowl of cereal , while and the others wait outside . They all hear commotion from inside , including screams and gunfire . appears , throwing the head of one of the at 's feet . She then steps forward , producing two adamantium claws from each of her hands and one from each foot and viciously attacks the . A stunned finally helps her fight and flees the scene in the limo with and in the backseat . Caliban is taken by the and tortured with sunlight in order to get him to use his powers to track the trio . demands to know who is and responds that she is very much like him . looks through 's phone for clues and finds a video which reveals that she used to work for in the genetics department . However , the phone dies before the video can finish . They stop at a convenience store to stock up on supplies . The clerk ( ) attempts to stop from shoplifting some chips and sunglasses but she easily flips him over and nearly claws him before intervenes , saying " Not okay " . He then takes a phone charger and cigar and leaves . That night , as the phone charges , watches the rest of 's video . She had documented her role as a nurse in the genetic experimentation of new mutant children , led by ( ) , with the intention of turning them into super soldiers . Using DNA from known mutants , most of whom were deceased , the children were conceived and born to anonymous mothers who would not be missed . The children , including , were dubbed X-23 and raised under harsh conditions . Simple pleasures , such as birthdays , were frowned upon . The experiment was deemed a failure due to the fact that the children sustained too much emotion and often refused to follow orders . With the introduction of , it was decided the children would be terminated . Rather than see them killed , helped orchestrate an escape and the location of was designated as a safe point so the children could live free in . In the video 's final moments , admits that she is not 's mother but loves her all the same . Addressing , she apologizes for lying about the total fee that she would pay him but hopes that , as her biological father , he will keep her safe . The trio enter and take residence in a hotel where discovers that has been reading an X - Men comic book . He finds that the coordinates to are included in the book and is convinced that the whole trip is a charade . Angry , he confronts to 's disdain and tells her the X - Men stories she 's been reading are fantasized and that does not exist . leaves and in their room and goes downstairs where he sees that the have followed them . Suddenly , everyone becomes paralyzed and realizes is suffering another seizure . Having ever been the only one able to partially resist the effects , struggles to make it back to the room where some of the have already found and . kills them all before injecting with his serum , ending the paralysis , and the three escape in a new vehicle . On the road , a report goes over the incident in and relates the similarity to an event that occurred in one year prior , but turns off the radio . They are nearly run off the road by a robotic freight truck and swerve to avoid a pickup hauling a trailer full of horses . Xavier convinces to help and uses his telepathic powers to bring the horses back . The driver introduces himself as Will ( ) accompanied by his wife ( ) and son ( ) . then helps push their pickup out of a ditch . offers and his ' family ' to have dinner with them which happily accepts . is eager to leave immediately after dinner but offers them to spend the night as it 's late . only agrees for 's sake and carries him upstairs to bed . Seeing that their water supply has been tampered with , Will goes out to investigate and tags along . They find and fix the obvious leak at the pump some distance away and are confronted by a group of thugs led by a man who owns the land . He harasses Will , saying he 's been skimping on payments , but hits one of the thugs in the face with his own rifle and breaks it over his knee , scaring them off . Back at the house , lies in bed and senses entering the room . He tearfully pleads with him to be patient with , asleep on the floor beside him , and expresses regret and remorse over what happened a year ago . It is implied that suffered a massive seizure at his school in which resulted in the deaths of most of the X - Men . He apologizes but pushes his claws through 's chest . attacks in ' defense . The attacker turns out to be a mindless and merciless clone of , the . The mutant abducts and slaughters and . Upon returning , Will is struck down by the and rushes upstairs to get Xavier who is just barely alive . consoles him , " It was n't me " , as he carries him downstairs . Outside , the wait with and . is confined in a surveillance van . The thugs who abused Will before arrive at the house in retaliation for their earlier humiliation but kills them all . sets Xavier down in the bed of a pickup truck . utters the name of their boat and dies . Bereaved , engages in a furious fight . Meanwhile , fights back against his captors and sets off two grenades , muttering the phrase his mother once told him : " Beware the light . " The van explodes and is thrown out while escapes . is nearly overpowered by the until Will rams into the mutant with his truck , pinning him against some farm equipment . Will repeatedly shoots with a shotgun and then turns the gun on . The gun is out of shots and Will collapses , dead . retrieves and takes her with 's body and drives away . The following morning , and his crew take care of the scene and inject with an agent to help him heal . buries in an unmarked grave in the woods while watches . Afterwards , he goes back to their truck and begins smashing it in fury before passing out . Later , wakes up in a clinic . The doctor ( ) tells he knows he 's a mutant and says he wants to help him , aware that the adamantium in his body is killing him . refuses and leaves with . He begrudgingly thanks her and she finally speaks by responding ' you 're welcome ' in . is perplexed as to why she never spoke before , but begins rattling in the names of her friends from . She tells they must meet up with them in and presses him with such persistence that finally concedes , but only to prove does n't exist . The two just barely make it and is drained to the point of unconsciousness , so much that had to drive the remaining miles there . At a cliff , a lift is dropped for so they can ascend and he and are finally able to rest along with the remaining children led by ( ) . The kids prank by shaving his beard in his sleep to more closely resemble how he looked in his youth , but is not amused . Rictor gives a serum that was used on them in to help him re - energize and heal , but he warns not to use it all at once . then tells that he 's done his job in delivering her to and emotionally explains that everyone he cares about dies and it 's better he leaves . bitterly responds that she should be fine , then . In the morning , the children are gone and is about to leave when he sees that the have caught up to them , tracking the children . runs to intercept them as the pick off the children one by one . Despite using their powers , the children are outnumbered . Injecting all of the healing agent at once , kills most of the and confronts who has rounded up the children and is holding them at gunpoint . Rice reveals that he is actually the son of the man killed by when he escaped the project . admits responsibility for the extinction of mutants thanks to a virus developed by that was seeped into food supplies . Before he can continue , shoots him dead in a desperate move and goes after . However , is released and fights his clone once more . Seeing that is in complete control of , the children gang up on him and use their collective powers ( electrocution , freezing , plant manipulation , etc . ) to kill him . As the healing agent in 's body wears off , he becomes overpowered by his younger clone until finally impales on a dead tree limb . then uses the adamantium bullet carried with him to shoot in the head , obliterating it . She runs to and cuts him down from the tree , but 's wounds are n't healing . tearfully tells to run with the others ; they 're free . She cries , calling him ' Daddy ' and responds , " So ... this is what it feels like " before he dies . The children bury and raise a cross at the head of the grave as recites from a Western , the movie laaksojen mies ( 1953 ) , that she and watched in the man has to be what he is , . Ca n't break the mold . There 's no living with the killing . There 's no going back . Right or wrong , it 's a brand . A brand that sticks . Now you run on home to your mother ... you tell her everything 's alright . There are no more guns in the valley . "The children then leave , their future uncertain but free . takes the cross on 's grave and tilts it sideways , to look like an X.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > A man ( ) sits in his car reading the headline of a newspaper article about a man who had been stabbed to death at a fast food restaurant . He is overcome with a wave of nostalgia and begins to narrate the story of when he was 12 years old and the time he first saw a dead human being . " " ( ) is playing cards inside a tree house with his best friends ( ) and ( ) . Each boy has his own story and a reputation to follow . comes from a family renowned for their dishonesty and abusive nature , which gives him a bad rap despite his tough but kind disposition . , rather eccentric , is recognizable by the mangled remains of his right ear which his mentally unstable father held down to a hot stove top . His father resides in a mental institution but speaks highly of him for serving in . The fourth of their group and the butt of many jokes , portly ( ) , begs to be let in the tree house , saying he has important news . The others make light fun of him until he asks if they want to go see a dead body . They all fall silent as he explains that , while looking for a misplaced penny jar under his porch , he overheard his older brother ( ) and friend ( ) discuss how found the body of , a kid who had recently gone missing . and his friends followed the story closely because was around their age , last seen picking blueberries in the woods outside of town . says the kid must have been hit by a train and refuses to report the discovery to the police because he was at the site in a stolen car . and the others decide to go find the body and accept recognition as local heroes . They make plans to tell their parents they 're sleeping over at each other 's homes the next day and to meet the next morning on the train tracks leading out of town . Come morning , goes to fetch his canteen in his older brother 's room . A few months prior his brother , ( ) , a popular athlete , died in a car accident . 's mother ( ) has been silent and distant since then and his father ( ) asks him why he ca n't have friends like 's or play sports like him . He has no interest in his son 's aspirations to become a writer and criticizes for stealing milk money at school . The only support received was from his brother who gave him an old cap , something he now cherishes . meets in town who takes him to a back alley and shows him the gun he swiped from his father 's bureau . lightly takes aim at a garbage can and pulls the trigger , thinking it 's not loaded . It is . It fires and sends the two running for the main street where they come across a few members of a gang led by ( ) . 's older brother , ( ) leers at the boys as steals 's cap and threatens with a lit cigarette . They let the boys go unharmed and walk away , laughing . and meet up with and at the train tracks where they realize no one 's brought food . They take out their money and agree to buy something along the way . As a train approaches , everyone but gets off the tracks . imitates shooting an automatic at the train , intent on dodging it at the last second , ' just like my father in ' . , however , pulls him off before the stunt can be performed and yells at him for nearly killing himself . They soon arrive at a local junkyard that is rumored to house a disgruntled owner with a ferocious dog named which he 's supposedly trained to attack any intruders , going right for the person 's balls . However , the yard is empty and the four rest in the shade of a car hood for a few minutes while , after losing a race , goes to retrieve food at the store on the other side . On his way back , he notices the others scrambling over the yard fence and turns just in time to see the owner , ( ) , emerge , yelling for . Due to the dog 's legendary reputation , when shouts for to ' sick 'em , , imagines that what 's saying is ' sick balls ' . frantically runs for the fence with the dog close on his heels but makes it over the top . He turns and sees that ( ) is not the dog he 'd expected . rushes over to the fence and berates the four boys for making fun of his dog . throws a few insults but is shocked silent when calls his father a loony . breaks down , shouting that his father stormed the beach at , and has to be led away by the others . Following the train tracks , they come to a bridge . They hesitate to cross , unsure of when the next train is due . Feeling confident , they begin to cross with and in the lead and trailing behind , who 's chosen to crawl instead of walk . , loses a comb that he packed in his shirt pocket which he 'd hoped to use once they found the body and reported it to the local news . consistently looks back and bends down to feel the rails . A light vibration leads him to see plumes of smoke in the distance . He shouts " ! " and yells at to get to his feet and run . They are barely able to make it to the other side and off the tracks . jokes that now , at least , they know when the next train is . As they continue deeper into the forest , lags behind with who is despondent about being a writer and does n't think much of his talents . tries to encourage him , saying that he wishes he was his father instead so that he could give him proper guidance and support . They set up camp for the night and tells them all a story about a kid named ( ) , stuck with such a name because of his weight . Sick and tired of being made fun of for his considerable size , takes revenge on the rest of his town by forcing himself to violently throw up during a blueberry pie eating contest . What ensues is a comedic chain reaction of perpetual barfing . The boys decide to sleep in shifts and takes the opportunity , while and sleep , to talk to alone . confides in him that he hates his family name and the association he has with them , wishing to leave to start fresh somewhere and actually make something of himself . He reveals that he did take the milk money at school first but felt remorseful about it and returned it to one of the teachers , who happened to show up to school the next day in a brand new dress . took the heat for the theft but could never atone to it because of his family 's reputation . The next morning , and his gang are seen spending recreational time smoking and hitting mailboxes with baseball bats as they drive through their neighborhood . and draw 's attention with their silence and they finally blab about finding 's body . Intent on claiming credit for himself , heads out with them , along with ( ) and . Meanwhile , and the others take a shortcut through the woods and land in a swamp infested with leeches . They strip down and finds one attached to his lower extremities , fainting after removing it . Eventually , they come back to the tracks and discover 's body ( ) , knocked clean out of his shoes and lying in some bushes . They decide to build a stretcher for him and breaks down , crying that his father truly hates him and knowing that he favored . At that moment , and the rest of the gang appear and demand that the boys leave so they can take the body . insults him and pulls out a knife before fires the gun in the air . He threatens , saying it 'll be all too easy to kill him , and leaves . announces that no one will get the credit for finding ; they will instead report it through an anonymous call . They return to town with narrating that it seemed so much smaller after their journey . As the boys split up and head home , narrates that and grew distant over the next few years . married straight out of high school , had four children , and became a fork lift driver at a lumberyard . attempted to join the army but was rejected due to his poor eyesight and ear injury . He eventually served some jail time and performed odd jobs around . managed to stick it in school with and went to college to become a lawyer . However , it 's revealed that he was stabbed and killed when he tried to break up a fight in a fast food restaurant ; the very article read at the start of the film . closes the film as he finishes a memoir he 's been writing about his childhood and leaves to take his son and friend ( and ) out swimming.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The following is based on a true story . The film opens at the in Nurburgring in 1976 . ( ) looks to the sky and narrates that he and ( ) have long been considered rivals , though he does n't know why people think that . As the race commences , the two of them , along with the other racers , speed off around the track . SIX YEARS EARLIERWe see going into a hospital with his uniform looking dirty and his nose is bloodied . When he introduces himself , everybody is stunned . He 's is treated by a cute nurse named ( ) . She tends to a wound on his abdomen done by another man using a crowbar . He tells that they had a disagreement over the man 's wife . She asks what he did , and he says only what she asked him to , which he offers to show . Cut to the two of them having sex at home ... more than once . takes to the circuit to meet his crew for a Three race . He starts puking , which concerns , but she 's assured that he does this before every race . That 's when sees coming around for the first time . The two enter the race , with nearly winning until he spins out and his motor heats up , giving the victory . confronts afterwards , calling him an asshole , but he gets laughed off by and his mates . We learn from that he comes from a family of politicians and economists . He asks his father for a loan to allow him to enter a One racing team , but he refuses . takes out a loan from the bank himself and uses it to buy his way in . He has his own car made as fast as he deems it should be , and has racer ( ) drive his car across the racetrack , proving it to be faster than the team 's previous car . Niki convinces manager ( ) to let him enter with his own car under the conditions that he has a spot on the team and he gets a two - year contract even though he 's just a rookie . Later , bumps into , saying he noticed he was talking to the pretty track manager . He informs her that her last boyfriend was also a racer , who was crazy and " an immortal fucker " . It was . 's team , , gives him a new car to race with , which he loves . He takes it to the racetrack at as they drive for One now . An accident takes place there , putting 's nerves on edge and causing him to throw up later . While in the garage , he visualizes himself racing when he meets a model named ( ) . Within a short amount of time , the two are married . After the wedding , is told that is set to drive for . is seen driving one of 's car , saying it 's a piece of crap . He later officially signs on for the team . Afterwards , drives with to a party , but stays outside . He spots a beautiful woman leaving the place . Her name is ( ) . He asks for a ride and she allows him to join her . On the road , he critiques the car and her driving , up until the car breaks down in the middle of the road . Marlene manages to get two Italian men to stop , and they get excited when they see . does n't realize who is , but she convinces him to drive fast for her . He does so , speeding through the road and thrilling her and the other two men . The 1975 One racing season takes place , with winning the world championship . Later at a party , speaks to , who thinks all of 's flash and showboating does n't mean anything . This gives more of an incentive to prepare for the following year 's championship to beat . goes to the garage to find that it is closed because they missed the deadline to secure sponsors . drowns his sorrows in booze and cigarettes , then gets angry and lashes out at . He later meets with the managers of the racing team , in which he is able to secure a position . The 1976 season begins . wins in and with placing second . comes in first in but is disqualified because the back of his car is deemed too wide . secures more victories in and . To make matters worse , learns that is having an affair with actor . After meeting with her one last time at a bar , they settle on a divorce . When he steps outside to greet the press , he makes a joke of the divorce as his easiest win . Later , 's disqualification is removed and his car is adjusted to fit the standards . and get married in a private ceremony and spend their honeymoon in . That evening , after some fun in the pool , tells that now that he 's found happiness , it has become an enemy of his , because he now feels he has something to lose . During practice for the , an accident takes place and a racer 's leg is terribly broken . holds a meeting with the other racers and racing officials , saying that because of the rainy weather , it would be too risky to race , and so it should be canceled . then leads the others to think that 's doing this so he can maintain his racing points , while another racer suggests that is frightened . admits that he is frightened , as the rain increases his risk of dying out there , but he knows everybody else is just as scared . Although some racers join the vote to cancel the race , the majority rules that the race continue as planned . The race goes on , with both and using rain tires , which they are forced to change at the pit stop because the track dries up quickly . During the third lap , a suspension arm in 's car breaks , causing him to swerve off the track and crash into a wall , resulting in the car becoming engulfed in flames . Two other cars hit him , and some racers run to pull out as he catches fire . He is taken to the hospital where six doctors and 34 nurses tend to him , and it is reported that his condition is worse than it was previously believed . Marlene hears of this news over the radio . Over six weeks , recovers in the hospital , albeit with third - degree burns to his face and toxic fumes in his lungs . His lungs are vacuumed out , and the top half of his head is disfigured . All throughout his stay , he watches continue racing and earning more points . When he is able to get back on his feet , tries to put his helmet back on , but the burns on his face make it painful . tells him to stop , but he tells her that if she loves him , she 'll let him do this . makes his return to the racetrack . He is met by , who says he tried to write him a letter while he was in the hospital and that he feels responsible for what happened to him . responds that is equally responsible for getting him back behind the wheel after watching him racing on TV.During a press conference , answers questions regarding his recovery and plans to continue racing . One reporter asks how his wife reacted when she saw his face . replies that she told him he does n't need a face to drive , but rather , the right foot . The reporter asks again if he thinks his marriage will suffer because of his disfigurement , to which says " Fuck you . " After the press conference , confronts the reporter and punches him repeatedly in the face for the question , then telling him , " Go home to your wife and ask her how you look . . "The final race comes at the , where it is raining harder than in . Before the race starts , and acknowledge each other and give a friendly wave and nod to one another . As the race goes on , takes the lead over , but he begins to think of . He forfeits the race to avoid risking his life again , and he rejoins his wife . continues the race under the intense conditions , and he is forced to make a late pit stop when the rubber on his tires starts wearing out . As he finishes the final lap , the scoreboard reads that he placed fifth , which would mean he missed out on the championship . However , it is reported that he finished third , allowing him to win . While he celebrates his victory , and leave in a helicopter . She asks him if he 's alright , and he says yes , because he has no regrets . Following his win , continues about his playboy lifestyle and endorses several products . While in , , he goes to an airfield to find , who has taken up flying planes . implies that he would have won if he continued the race , and it was unacceptable for to take all those risks . Before leaves , tells him that he had gotten something big in finding an enemy . smiles and goes back with his friends . The film ends with brief footage of the real and . narrates again saying that retired two years later . When he died of a heart attack at the age of 45 , felt sad , as was one of the few people he respected , and , to this day , the only person he > 

 < synopsis > The following synopsis has mostly been taken from the film 's wikipedia page : ( ) , the longtime anchor of the 's , learns from the news division president , ( ) , that he has just two more weeks on the air because of declining ratings . The two old friends get roaring drunk and lament the state of their industry . The following night , announces on live television that he will commit suicide on next 's broadcast . fires him after this incident , but intervenes so that can have a dignified farewell . Beale promises he will apologise for his outburst , but once on the air , he launches back into a rant claiming that life is " bullshit " . 's causes the newscast 's ratings to spike , and much to 's dismay , the upper echelons of decide to exploit 's antics rather than pull him off the air . In one impassioned diatribe , galvanises the nation , persuading his viewers to shout out of their windows " I 'm as mad as hell , and I 'm not going to take this ( ) heads the network 's programming department ; seeking just one hit show , she cuts a deal with a band of radical terrorists ( a parody of the called the " " ) for a new docudrama series called the - for the upcoming fall season . When 's ratings seem to have topped out , approaches and offers to help him " develop " the news show . He says no to the professional offer , but not to the personal one , and the two begin an affair . When decides to end the as the " " format , convinces her boss , , to slot the evening news show under the entertainment division so she can develop it . agrees , bullies the executives to consent , and fires at the same time . Soon afterward , is hosting a new program called The , top - billed as " the mad prophet of the airwaves " . Ultimately , the show becomes the most highly rated program on television , and finds new celebrity preaching his angry message in front of a live studio audience that , on cue , chants 's signature catchphrase en masse : " We 're as mad as hell , and we 're not going to take this anymore . " At first , and 's romance withers as the show flourishes , but in the flush of high ratings , the two ultimately find their way back together , and leaves his wife of over 25 years for . But 's fanatical devotion to her job and emotional emptiness ultimately drive back to his wife , and he warns his former lover that she will self - destruct at the pace she is running with her career . " You are television incarnate , , " he tells her , " indifferent to suffering , insensitive to joy . All of life is reduced to the common rubble of banality . "When discovers that of ( ) , the conglomerate that owns , will be bought out by an even larger Saudi Arabian conglomerate , he launches an on - screen tirade against the deal , encouraging viewers to send telegrams to the telling them , " I want the deal stopped now ! " This throws the top network brass into a state of panic because the company 's debt load has made merger essential for survival . takes to meet with chairman , who explicates his own " corporate cosmology " to the attentive . delivers a tirade of his own in an " appropriate setting " , the dramatically darkened boardroom , that suggests to the docile that may himself be some higher power describing the interrelatedness of the participants in the international economy and the illusory nature of nationality distinctions . persuades to abandon the populist messages and preach his new " evangel " . But television audiences find his new sermons on the dehumanisation of society depressing , and ratings begin to slide , yet will not allow executives to fire . Seeing its two - for - the - price - of - one value , solving the problem plus sparking a boost in season - opener ratings . , , and the other executives decide to hire the to assassinate on the air . The assassination succeeds , putting an end to The and kicking off a second season of The - . The film ends with the narrator was the story of , the first known instance of a man who was killed because he had lousy ratings . "</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > Nine years have passed since the events of Before , when ( ) and ( ) had met in . Since then , has written a novel , This , inspired by his time with , and the book has become an American bestseller . To help sales in , does a book tour . The last stop of the tour is , and is doing a reading at the bookstore and Company . As talks with his audience , flashbacks are shown of him and in ; the memories of their night together have clearly remained with him despite it being nine years later . Three journalists are present at the bookstore , interviewing : a romantic who is convinced the book 's main characters meet again , a cynic who is convinced that they do n't , and a third one who , despite wanting them to meet again , remains doubtful they actually do . They represent the three possible ways a viewer might guess what the aftermath of Before might be , according to his or her own personality . appears in the audience and sees him , and he , in turn , recognizes her . has a short time before his plane departs and invites to share it with him . However , once the presentation is over , the bookstore manager reminds him he 's got a plane to catch and must leave for the airport in a little more than an hour , and so just like in Before , and 's reunion is constrained by time . Just like in the prequel , the characters are thus forced to make the best of what little time they have together , and this makes it easier for their conversations to become ever more personal , starting out with the usual thirty - something 's themes of work and politics and then , with ever increasing passion , approaching their love for each other , just as their time together is running out . As they talk , each reveals what has happened since their first meeting . Both are now in their early thirties . , now a writer , is married and has a son . has become an advocate for the environment , lived in for a time , and has a boyfriend , a photojournalist . It becomes clear in the course of their talk that both are dissatisfied to varying degrees with their lives . reveals that he only stays with his wife out of love for his son . says that she does not see her boyfriend very much because he is so often on assignment . Early in their conversation , they broach the subject of why they did not meet as promised , six months after their first encounter . It turns out that had returned to as promised , but did not , because her grandmother had suddenly died before the scheduled date of the meeting . Because and had never exchanged addresses , there was no way for them to contact each other , which resulted in their missed connection . Their conversation as they traverse places them in various venues , including a caf , a garden , a bateau mouche , and 's hired car for his stay in . Their old feelings for each other are slowly rekindled , even with tension and regret over the missed meeting earlier , as they realize that nothing else in their lives has matched their one night together in nine years prior . eventually admits that he wrote the book in the distant hope of meeting again one day . She replies that the book brought back painful memories for her . At one point , in the hired car , during a tense moment when is confessing his loveless , near sexless marriage , reaches her hand out to touch but pulls back just as he turns to her . In the concluding scene , and arrive at her apartment . had learned that plays the guitar and persuades her to play a waltz song for him . The waltz ( which was written by herself ) is revealed through the lyrics to be about their brief encounter . then plays a on the stereo system . Celine dances by herself to the song " Just in " as watches her . As imitates , she mutters to , " Baby ... you are gon na miss that plane . " As the camera slowly pans in , smiles while nervously fidgeting with his wedding ring and ambiguously responds , " I know , " leaving the viewer to guess whether he stays or leaves , just like the three journalists who interviewed at the beginning of the film.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > A young man leaves his middle class existence in pursuit of freedom from relationships and obligation . Giving up his home , family , all possessions but the few he carried on his back , and donating all his savings to charity , ( ) embarks on a journey throughout . His eventual aim is to travel into , into the wild , to spend time with nature , with ' real ' existence , away from the trappings of the modern world . In the 20 months leading up to his Great , his travels lead him on a path of self - discovery , to examine and appreciate the world around him and to reflect on and heal from his troubled childhood and parents ' sordid and abusive relationship . When he reaches , he finds he is insufficiently prepared and despite making it through the winter he prepares to return home in spring , only to find the frozen stream he crossed in the snow has become an impassable , raging torrent , and that he is trapped . With no means of sustaining himself adequately , he eventually starves to death in his so - sought - after isolation . Throughout his epic journey the people he meets both influence and are influenced by the person he is and bring him to the final and tragic realization that " Happiness is only real when shared" . It must be noted that this is not the true story , it is the synopsis of the film . Any background information on the film or its characters and setting can and should be found in the user comments section of this film.*************************************************************************************************************In 1992 , ( ) arrives in a remote area of the and in , and sets up a campsite in an abandoned bus . At first , is content with the isolation , the beauty of nature , and the thrill of living off the land . He hunts wild animals with a .22 - caliber rifle , reads books , and keeps a diary as he prepares for himself a new life in the wild . Two years earlier in 1990 , graduated with high honors from . Shortly afterwards , rejects his conventional life by destroying all of his credit cards and identification documents . He donates nearly his entire savings of $ 24,000 to , and sets out on a cross - country drive in his well - used yet reliable to experience life in the wilderness . However , does not tell his parents ( ) and ( ) or his sister ( ) what he is doing or where he is going , and refuses to keep in touch with them after his departure , leaving them to become increasingly anxious and eventually desperate . At , ' automobile is caught in a flash flood . forcing him to abandon it and begin hitchhiking . He burns what remains of his dwindling cash supply and assumes a new name : . In northern , encounters a hippie couple named ( ) and ( ) . tells about his failing relationship with , which would rekindle . By , stops in Carthage , to work for a contract harvesting company owned by ( ) , but he is forced to leave after is arrested for satellite piracy . then travels to the and , though he is told by park rangers that he may not kayak down it without a license , he ignores their warnings and paddles downriver until he eventually arrives in . There , his kayak is lost in a dust storm and he crosses back into the on foot . Unable to get a ride , he starts traveling via freight train to . Not long after arriving , however , he starts feeling corrupted by modern civilization and decides to leave . Later , is forced to switch his traveling method back to hitchhiking after he is beaten by a railroad bull . In 1991 , arrives at in the of , and encounters and again . There he meets ( ) , a teenager who falls for . After the holidays , decides to continue heading for , much to everyone 's sadness . While camping near , , encounters ( ) , a retiree who recounts the story of the loss of his family in a car accident while he was serving in the army . He now occupies his time in a workshop as an amateur leather worker . teaches the craft of leatherwork , resulting in the making of a belt that details ' travels . After spending several months with , decides to leave for despite the upset of , who has become quite close to . On parting , gives his old camping and travel gear along with the offer to adopt him as his grandchild , but simply tells him that they should discuss it after he returns from , and then departs . Months later at the abandoned bus , life for becomes harder and he becomes less discerning . As his supplies begin to run out , he realizes that nature is also harsh and uncaring . In the pain of realization , concludes that true happiness can only be found when shared with others , and seeks to return from the wild to his friends and family . However , he finds that the stream he had crossed during the winter has become wide , deep , and violent due to the thaw , and he is unable to cross . Saddened , he returns to the bus , now as a prisoner who is no longer in control of his fate and can only hope for help from the outside . In a desperate act , is forced to gather and eat roots and plants , but he confuses similar plants and becomes ill as a result . Slowly dying , he continues to document his process of self - realization and accepts his fate , as he imagines his family for one last time . He writes a farewell to the world and crawls into his sleeping bag to die . Two weeks later , his body is found by moose hunters . Shortly afterwards , returns her brother 's ashes by airplane from to in her backpack.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) is an orphaned teenager who lives with her ( ) and ( ) on a farm in the early 1900s . She daydreams about going " over the rainbow " after ( ) , a nasty neighbor , hits 's dog ( ) on the back with a rake , causing to bite her . shows up with an order to take to the sheriff to be euthanized , but jumps out of the basket on the back of 's bicycle and runs back to . Fearing that , who does not know that has escaped , will return , takes the dog and runs away from home . She meets an itinerant phony teller , ( ) , who immediately guesses that has run away . Pretending to tell her fortune and wishing to reunite with her aunt , he tells her that has fallen ill from worry over her . immediately returns home with , only to find a tornado approaching . Unable to reach her family in their storm cellar , enters the house , is knocked unconscious by a loose window , and apparently begins to dream . Along with her house and , she 's swept from her sepia - toned world to the magical , beautiful , dangerous and technicolor land of . The tornado drops 's house on the of the , killing her . The witch ruled the of the , little people who think at first that herself must be a witch . The of the ( again ) , who is the sister of the dead witch , threatens . But ( ) , the of the , gives the dead witch 's enchanted , and the slippers protect her . advises that if wants to go home to , she should seek the aid of the of , who lives in the . To get there , sets off down the . Before she 's followed the road very far , meets a talking scarecrow whose dearest wish is to have a brain . Hoping that the wizard can help him , the ( ) joins on her journey . They come upon the ( ) , who was caught in the rain and is so rusty he ca n't move . When they oil his joints so he can walk and talk again , he confesses that he longs for a heart ; he too joins . As they walk through a dense forest , they encounter the ( ) , who wishes for courage and joins the quest in the hope that the wizard will give him some . 's three friends resemble the three farmhands who work for 's aunt and uncle back in . On the way to the , and her friends are hindered and menaced by the of the . She incites trees to throw apples at them , then tries to set the scarecrow on fire . Within sight of the city , the witch conjures up a field of poppies that cause , , and the lion to fall asleep . saves them by making it snow , which counteracts the effects of the poppies . The four travelers marvel at the wonders they find in the and take time to freshen up : , and the have their hair done , the gets polished , and the scarecrow receives an infusion of fresh straw stuffing . As they emerge looking clean and spiffy , the appears on her broomstick and skywrites " " above the city . The friends are frustrated at their reception by the " great and powerful " of ( again ) -- at first he wo n't receive them at all . When they finally see him ( the doorkeeper lets them in because he had an himself ) , the declines to help them until they bring him the broomstick of the of the . Daunted but determined , they set off again . The witch sends winged monkeys to attack 's party before they reach her castle ; the monkeys snatch and and scatter the others . When the witch finds that the ca n't be taken against 's will as long as the girl is alive , she turns her hourglass and threatens that will die when it runs out . Meanwhile , has escaped and run for help . Dressed as guardsmen , the , the , and the sneak into the castle and free . They 're discovered before they can escape , however , and the witch and her guards corner them and set the on fire . douses him with a pail of water , splashing the witch by accident . The water causes the witch to disintegrate ( " I 'm melting ! " ) . The guards are happy to let have the witch 's broomstick , and and her friends return to the . The wizard is n't pleased to see them again . He blusters until pulls aside a curtain in the corner of the audience chamber to reveal an old man who resembles pulling levers and speaking into a microphone -- the so - called wizard , as the says , is a humbug . He 's abashed and apologetic , but quickly finds ways to help 's friends : a diploma for the , a medal of valor for the , and a testimonial heart - shaped watch for the . Then he reveals that he 's from himself and came to in a hot - air balloon , in which he proposes to take home . The wizard appoints the , , and rulers of in his absence . Just as the balloon is about to take off runs after a cat and follows him . Unable to stop , the wizard leaves without . But appears and explains that has always had the power to get home ; did n't tell her before because would n't have believed it . Bidding her friends a tearful good - bye , taps her heels together three times , repeats " There 's no place like home , " and the take her and Toto back to . wakes up in her own bed with and fussing over her . and the farmhands ( again ) , ( again ) , and ( again ) stop by to see how she 's doing . She raises indulgent laughter when she tells them about , but she 's so happy to be home she does n't mind that they do n't believe her . is never mentioned > 

 < synopsis>(Previous content of this page was removed due to copyright concerns ; the synopsis had been taken from . Please feel free to replace this notice with a legitimate synopsis of this film . Thanks.)</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > At the end of , ( ) , ( ) and ( ) return home to . was a decorated captain in the in , a sergeant in the who saw action in the , and a sailor who served on an aircraft carrier in the . 's ship was sunk , killing many of his fellow sailors ; his arms were burned off below the elbow and he now uses metal hook prostheses . The three men share first a plane trip then a cab ride and become friends . Although he rose to the rank of captain , was an unskilled soda jerk before the war , while the older was a bank executive . was a star athlete engaged to be married to the girl next door , ( ) . Aware of how uncomfortable his hooks make people , begins to pull away from and his family . He feels comfortable only when he is with and or hanging out with his ( ) , who owns a comfortable tavern . is married to ( ) but ca n't find her when he returns home , as she has begun to work nights at one of 's night clubs . struggles to readjust to family life . His wife , ( ) and daughter , ( ) , do their best to make him comfortable , but he develops a drinking problem . On his first night home , he insists they go out drinking . At 's , they run into and , who has come there to get away from . and get extremely drunk . When passes out in front of 's apartment building , and Milly take him home with them . The next morning , drives to 's building . On the way , they struggle with the fact they are attracted to one another . is promoted at the bank . He is now in charge of approving loans to servicemen under the . He believes in taking risks on the servicemen even if they do n't have any collaterol for loans . Although the director of the bank gently upbraids him in private , he applauds 's slightly drunken public speech that providing the servicemen loans is tantamount to investing in the country 's future . knows the bank will continue to question his loan approvals . and initially do well upon his return , when he still has money he earned in the . But when it runs out , he is forced to return to his job as a soda jerk . This angers , who wants to be married to a dashing , successful , rich military man . Peggy visits at the drug store , and they have lunch together . Afterwards , they kiss . That night , phones and asks her and out on a double date with a man she is uninterested in . despises the way speaks of and resolves to break up their marriage . When she tells this to and , they tell her that all marriages struggle and that she should leave and alone . The next day , orders to never see again . calls to break things off , devestating her . continues to isolate himself . Late one night , comes over and tells him that her parents want her to break off their engagement , though she does n't want to . He takes her to his room to show her how difficult life will be with him : removing his prostheses , he shows her that he is unable to button his pajamas or even open a door . Tenderly , buttons his pajamas and tells him that she loves him and will never leave him . finally accepts that people will accept him . is fired from his job when he punches out a man who had told that he and anyone else who died in the war were suckers who fought on the wrong side . takes up with a successful serviceman and announces her intention of divorcing . Disillusioned , decides to leave town for good , leaving behind the medals and citations he won during the war . While waiting for an transport plane out of town , he reminisces inside a decommissioned bomber like the one he flew over . When the foreman of the company dismantling the planes tells him the metal will be used to build new houses , talks him into a job . is best man at 's wedding to . He sees for the first time since being ordered to leave alone . After the ceremony , and embrace . He tells her that life with him will be hard as he does n't have much money . She smiles and kisses > 

 < synopsis > On 1 , self - centered and sour TV meteorologist ( ) , news producer ( ) and cameraman ( ) from fictional television station - travel to , , to cover the annual festivities with , the . Having grown tired of this assignment , begrudgingly gives his report the next day ( 2 ) during the festival and parade . After the celebration concludes , a blizzard develops that Connors had predicted would miss them , closing the roads and shutting down long - distance phone services , forcing the team to return to . However , awakens the next morning to find it is 2 again , and his day unfolds in almost exactly the same way . Connors can change his behavior , but other people do and say the same things they did and said the previous day , unless Connors changes something . He is aware of the repetition , but everyone else seems to be living 2 for the first time . This recursion repeats the following morning and the one after that , and over and over again . For , begins each morning at 6:00 , when he wakes up in his room in a Victorian bed and breakfast . His clock radio is always playing the same song , " I Got You " by & . His memories of the " previous " day are intact , but he is trapped in a seemingly endless time loop , repeating the same day in the same small town . After briefly trying to rationalize his situation , and then thinking he is insane , Connors takes advantage of learning the day 's events and the information he is able to gather about the town 's inhabitants , and finds that his actions have no long - term consequences for himself . He revels in this situation for a time : seducing beautiful women , stealing money , even driving drunk and experiencing a police chase . However , his attempts to seduce his producer , , are met with repeated failures . He begins to tire of , and then dread , his existence , starting the day by smashing the alarm clock and professing the inanity of as a holiday in his newscast . In a vain attempt to break the cycle , he kidnaps the . After a police pursuit , Connors drives a stolen truck into a quarry , causing both man and rodent to die in a fiery explosion ; but the loop does not stop . He commits suicide several more times . He electrocutes himself , lets a truck hit him on the road , and jumps from a tall building ( other attempts are alluded to ) but mere death can not stop the day from repeating . After he dies , he simply wakes up listening to & in the same bed , on the same day , over and over again . He initially tries to seduce by learning as much as he can on a daily basis . First he asks what she wants in a man : someone who is humble , kind , generous , courageous and sensitive ; someone who likes children ; someone who loves his mother and plays a musical instrument . He learns what she likes ( rocky road ice cream , sweet vermouth , French poetry ) and what she does n't like ( white chocolate ) and pretends to share her tastes . This also fails consistently ; in scene after scene , slaps him before the night is over . However , he is able to befriend her in a more sincere fashion . He tells her of his circumstances -- how he is reliving the day over and over again -- and manages to convince her of the truth with his extensive knowledge of events to come , the lives of the townspeople , and herself . He opens his heart to , and her advice helps him to gradually find a goal for his trapped life : as a benefactor to others . He can not , in a single day , bring others to fulfill his needs but he can achieve self - improvement by educating himself on a daily basis . After seeing an elderly homeless man die , Connors vows that no one will die on " his " day and performs many heroic services each and every repeating day , including performing the maneuver on a choking man and saving a little boy who falls from a tree . However , he becomes despondent at being unable to save the homeless man , despite trying to get him medical care . When he demands to see the man 's medical chart , a nurse tells him " sometimes people just die . " Connors replies " Not today , " but he never manages to prevent it . Though the film does not specify the number of repetitions , there is enough time for Connors to learn many complex skills , such as how to play jazz piano , speak , sculpt ice , and memorize the life story of almost everyone in town . He also masters the art of flipping playing cards into an upturned hat , which he offhandedly suggests takes six months.(According to , who shares screenwriting credit with the director , the intent in the original script was for the time - frame of ' repeating days to be ambiguous , but longer than a single lifetime . The studio objected to this , asking that it be reduced to two weeks . tried to leave the time - frame loop ambiguous as how many times Connors relives 2 , but it is strongly speculated by Connors ( and the viewers ) to be at least 10 years.)Eventually , sees his own shadow , so to speak , and changes from an inconsiderate , callous egocentric into a thoughtful , kindhearted philanthropist , refining his understanding of human decency , which , in return , makes him an appreciated and beloved man in the town . is able to befriend almost everyone he meets during the day , using his experiences to save lives and help the townspeople . In the process , he gets closer to . He crafts a report on the celebration so eloquent that all the other stations turn their microphones to him . After the big evening dance , and retire together to 's room . They believe that if is there , the cycle may be interrupted . He wakes the next morning in bed with ( they are both still fully clothed ) and finds the time loop is broken ; it is now 3 . is a different person than he was on 1 and , after going outside , and talk about living in together . Connors suggests : " We 'll rent to start . "The closing song is " Almost Like Being in " from , a musical which also dealt with a village trapped in time.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) is an elderly Catholic priest on an archeological dig in . has a sense of foreboding and encounters a number of strange omens , including the unearthing of a series of confusing items , a near miss with a runaway horse drawn carriage , and a clock that stops ticking in mid - stroke . Finally , discovers a statue of a bizarre demonic figure ; although the film does not mention it , it is a representation of a demonic figure known as . Back in the , in 's upscale neighborhood , a successful actress named ( ) begins experiencing strange phenomena . lives with her twelve - year - old daughter ( ) , her personal assistant ( ) , and two housekeepers . 's father is estranged for reasons unknown . There are mysterious , unexplained sounds in the attic of the house , which attributes to rats . slowly begins to exhibit strange behavior , undergoing behavioral changes much like depression and anxiety . She turns up in 's bed one night , complaining that her own bed was " . is working on a new movie in with a director known as ( ) . While filming a scene one day , she notices a young Catholic priest watching her ; his name is ( ) . has a background in psychology and counsels parishoners at a nearby church ; also notices him while walking home from the shoot one day . is a thoughtful , conflicted man . He discusses his vocation with a superior and asks to be transferred because he feels he is losing his faith . He also has an elderly mother who lives alone in a slum in ; he visits her and is reminded of how lonely her life is , and he feels guilty that she has to live in such poor surroundings . The strange occurrences in the house begin to increase . reveals that she has been playing with a board and claims that she has the ability to communicate with a spiritual entity all by herself . A nearby Catholic church is desecrated , a statue of the painted crudely and adorned with conical clay additions made to resemble breasts and a penis . also works with clay and paint , making small animal sculptures . Meanwhile , 's mother falls ill and , due to a lack of funds , she is placed in a very shabby hospital and resigned to a ward full of mental patients . is distraught when he visits her and she seems to blame him for her situation . Later , she passes away under these conditions , adding to his sorrow . has an elaborate party at her home with a number of affluent guests . One of her guests is another named ( ) , and asks him about , having noticed him and referring to him as " intense " . She finds that and are good friends . During the party , appears happy and social , but she reappears after being sent to bed , dressed in her nightgown and urinates on the carpet in front of the guests while making an ominous statement to a prominent astronaut ( " You 're gon na die up there " ) . After the guests leave , bathes and puts her to bed , but is startled by a loud sound from 's bedroom . She rushes back down the hall and discovers 's bed shaking violently , rising up off the floor with on it . jumps on the bed and it still levitates . subjects to a series of medical tests to discover what the problem is . The doctors are unable to discover anything , despite putting through some grueling , painful procedures . The best they can come up with is that may have a lesion on her brain , but ultimately they are frustrated when nothing appears on her brain scan . At 's house , suffers what appears to be a seizure , and two doctors visit to assist . They find her rising and falling up and down on the bed in a way that seems impossible for a human being . When they try to sedate her , she hurls them across the room with abnormal strength , speaking to them in what seems to be a male voice : " Keep away ! The sow is mine ! " Eventually they sedate her . Out of options , they advise to search for a psychiatrist , but they also reluctantly discuss another possibility : they mention the phenomenon of demonic possession and the rite of exorcism . While they seem to hold professional contempt for it , they do admit that it has been known to solve problems such as what is going through . is skeptical , having no real religious affiliation of her own . The situation worsens when is out one evening ; she returns to find the house deserted except for , who is alone in her bedroom and appears to be in deep sleep . The bedroom is freezing cold , the window standing wide open , and she is uncovered . returns and is furious with her for leaving unattended , but explains that she left in the care of , who was visiting the house , while she went to the pharmacy to get 's medication . 's absence is unexplained until the doorbell rings and an associate of 's breaks the news that has just died on the steps outside 's house . Shortly after this , is visited by a kindly detective named ( ) , who seems suspicious of 's death . He questions about the events of that evening , and is nervous , hesitant to tell him about 's problem . While he is visiting , he notices a few small animal figures that has crafted ; they are similar in style to the desecration of the statue in the church . Kinderman leaves and immediately a violent disturbance comes from 's bedroom . hears a deep male voice bellowing at to " do it " , and screaming in protest . In the bedroom , finds plunging a crucifix violently into her vagina . When tries to stop her , assaults her with impossible strength , and furniture around the room starts to move on its own . As watches in horror , her daughter 's head turns completely around backwards , and she speaks to in 's voice , saying to her " Do you know what she did ? Your cunting daughter ? ? " then realizes that is responsible for 's death . Desperate , arranges to meet with , and when she mentions the notion of exorcism , is almost amused . He tells her that exorcism is nearly unheard of , and that he does n't know anybody who has ever performed one . is distraught and convinces him to meet with anyway . is shocked by the girl 's appearance ; she is tied to the headboard of her bed , her face misshapen and covered in lesions , her voice deep and gravelly . Regan announces that she 's the devil , and toys with in a number of ways , seeming to make a drawer next to the bed open all by itself , then speaking to in a number of languages . She also conjures up the voice of a subway vagrant that has encountered alone earlier . remains unconvinced , and when claims " Your mother 's in here with us " , asks her what his mother 's maiden name is . Unable to answer , vomits spectacularly all over him . cleans 's sweater and discusses with him . is still not convinced that is possessed , especially because says she 's " the devil " , and he recommends psychiatric care for her . pleads with him to help her obtain an exorcism , swearing that the " thing " in the bed upstairs is not her daughter . While thinks it over , he is approached by , who questions him about the fact that the desecration of the church could be connected to 's death ; what he was unable to tell was that 's body was found with his head turned completely around backwards , and the police department considers it a homicide . knows that suspects something unusual about the house , but his confidentiality as a priest prevents him from discussing it with . visits again and records their conversation , during which he sprinkles with water . He tells her it is holy water and she begins to writhe in pain , seemingly going into a trance and speaking in a strange language . Later he tells that it will be difficult to make a case with the for possession ; the water he sprinkled on was simply tap water , and was not blessed . The , and himself , would consider to be mentally ill and not possessed . confides in and tells him that was the one who killed . Later , uses his tape recordings of 's seemingly incomprehensible babble to discover that she is really speaking backwards , in . A phone call from interrupts him ; she summons him to the house to see , not wanting to see that 's happening : as they look at 's unconscious body , the words " help me " begin to materialize on her stomach , rising up in her skin like scar tissue . reluctantly agrees to try and get an exorcism for , although he seems to have more in common with the doctors who recommended it as a form of shock therapy . The church calls in to perform the exorcism , with assisting . has performed exorcisms in the past , including a difficult one that " nearly killed him " , according to the . When arrives at the house , bellows his name from upstairs , as if she knows him , and she makes strange animal sounds . He warns about conversing with the demon , and reminds him that the demon will mix lies with the truth to confuse and attack them . When they enter 's bedroom , she immediately begins with a string of obscenities . and recite the ritual of exorcism and manifests strange phenomena such as levitation , telekinesis , an abnormally long tongue , and strange vomiting . She constantly curses the priests and emits evil laughter and verbal abuse . begins to talk to in the voice of his mother , and he starts to break down . sends him away ; when he returns , he finds dead on the floor , the victim of a heart attack . cackles gleefully , infuriating , who grabs her and shouts at the demon , " Come into me ! Take me ! " The transference works almost immediately ; begins to transform and returns to her normal self . Before can harm her , his " normal " personality breaks through for a split second and he commits suicide , hurling himself out 's window . Just as did , he tumbles down the stairs outside 's window and lays dying in the street below . By chance , happens upon the scene and administers the last rites to his friend . In a brief epilogue , we see and as they prepare to leave the house in . They are visited by . speaks with him privately and tells him that does n't remember anything about the possession or the exorcism . then appears and greets him cheerfully , transfixed by 's white collar . Before they leave , she suddenly hugs and kisses him . As pulls away in their car , she orders the driver to stop for a moment and gives the religious medallion that belonged to ; in their struggle , had torn it from his body and it was in her bedroom all along.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > Before the 1939 invasion of by , the stars of a theater company in are the " ham " actor ( ) and his beautiful wife , ( ) . As part of the company 's rehearsal of " " , a play satirizing the Nazis , one of the actors , ( ) , takes to the street to prove that he looks like in his costume and makeup . People gawk at the appearance of the dictator in , until a young girl asks for the autograph of " . "That night , when the company is performing 's , with in the title role , commiserates with his friend and colleague , ( ) , about being limited to being spear carriers . , who is Jewish , reveals that it has always been his dream to perform in of , especially the famous " not a eyes ? " speech . Meanwhile , has received a bouquet of flowers from the handsome young ( ) . She arranges to meet him , telling to come to her dressing room when begins his " To be or not to be ... " speech , so they can be sure of privacy . The young man walks out , very obviously , when begins his monologue , causing the highly - strung actor great distress . Shortly thereafter , the company is ordered by a government representative to cancel their production of " " out of fear it would offend the and upset the tensions between the two nations . The next night , after a brief ( and chaste ) assignation , again walks out during " To be or not to be " , freshly infuriating . Sobinski returns backstage to confess his love to , assuming that she will leave her husband and the stage to be with him . Before she can correct his assumption , news breaks out that has invaded . Sobinski leaves to join the fight , and the actors huddle in the basement of the theater as is decimated by bombings . conquers , and the Polish division of the is fighting to free its mother country . and other young pilots of the division sing together , with the Polish resistance leader ( ) as their guest . Siletsky hints he will return to soon , and the men jump to give him messages for their relatives , but is suspicious when he gives a message for and he does n't know who the famous actress is . When reports the incident to higher authorities , they realize that now has a list of the names and addresses of relatives of Polish airmen in the , against whom reprisals can be taken . is sent to to warn the resistance , but gets there before him . The flier manages to reach , who passes on the message to the underground . Immediately after , she is stopped by two soldiers , who have been ordered by to bring her to him so he can deliver 's message and determine what " To be or not to be " means to her . invites to dinner , hoping to recruit her as a spy , as well as to sample her charms . She pretends to be interested and goes home to dress more appropriately for the occasion . Just before she arrives at her apartment , returns and finds in his bed and his bathrobe . and try to figure out what to do about , while tries to figure out what is going on with his wife and the pilot . In the end , proclaims that he will kill . Later that evening , returns to 's room and pretends to be attracted to him . Just as they kiss , there is a knock at the door . A Nazi officer actually one of the members of the acting company summons to " Gestapo headquarters " , which is the theatre , hastily disguised with props and costumes from their play . Tura pretends to be of the , and gives him the report containing the names and addresses of the families of the Polish pilots . He also reveals that gave him a message for , and that " To be or not to be " was the signal for their rendezvous . Tura reacts in an extremely jealous way and declares he will have arrested . Noting this overreaction , quickly sees that he has been duped , pulls a gun on and tries to escape , but is shot and killed by . Tura returns to the hotel disguised as in a fake beard and glasses , to destroy the copy of the information about the Polish resistance that has in his trunk and to confront about her affair . Unfortunately , he 's met at the hotel by the real 's adjutant , . ( ) , and taken to meet himself ( ) . Tura manages to pass himself off as , defuses the information by naming recently executed prisoners as the leaders of the resistance , and learns that himself will visit the next day . The next day , the real 's body is discovered in the theater . sends for to tell her , but she is unable to warn in time , and he arranges another meeting with , again posing as . When arrives , sends him into a room with 's dead body , hoping to frighten him into a confession . Thinking quickly , shaves off 's beard and then attaches a spare fake beard that he was carrying in his pocket . He then calls into the room and manipulates him into pulling 's now - fake beard off . This appears to prove that the real was actually the imposter , but just as is about to make his escape , the other actors , sent by and again in costume , storm into 's office , yank off 's false beard and pretend to drag him away to prison . This gets Tura out of Gestapo headquarters , but now he can not leave the country on the plane had arranged for him , and it 's only a matter of time before the ruse is discovered . The company now comes up with a bold plan . The stage a show at the theater to honor , and , , and the other actors sneak in dressed as . The actors hide until arrives and takes his seat , and then , as the are singing the German national anthem inside , suddenly appears and rushes the box . This distracts the 's guards long enough for , now wearing a mustache , to emerge unnoticed from hiding , surrounded by his entourage of actors dressed as officers . Playing the head of 's guard , demands to know what wants , and the actor finally gets his chance to deliver 's famous speech from The of . He ends with a ringing " if you wrong us , shall we not revenge ? ! " and orders his " officers " to take away . He also recommends that / leave immediately , and all the actors march out , get in 's cars and drive away . Back at her apartment , is waiting for the actors to pick her up . They all intend to leave on 's plane , but shows up and tries to seduce her . is amazed , however , when the door opens and walks in disguised as . simply turns and walks out in silence , but immediately thinks that is having an affair with and he has just been caught trying to steal the 's mistress . dashes after calling , " , Fhrer!"All the actors take off in the plane . They easily dispose of the pilots , and flies the plane to , where the actors are interviewed by the press . Asked what reward he 'd like for his service to the , hesitates in a show of false modesty , but quickly responds for him , " He wants to play . "In the final scene , is now once again on stage at a theater in as and reaches the moment of " To be or not to be . " He sees in the audience as he begins the speech , but both are amazed when a new young officer gets up and noisily heads backstage.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > ( ) , and his wife ( ) , are the world 's greatest famous crime - fighting superheroes in , always saving lives and battling evil on a daily basis . But 15 years later , they have been forced to adopt civilian identities and retreat to the suburbs where they have no choice but to retire as superheroes to live a " normal life " with their three children , and - , who were born with secret superpowers . Itching to get back into action , gets his chance when a mysterious communication summons him to a remote island for a top - secret assignment . He soon discovers that it will take a super family effort to rescue the world from total destruction.Anthony { hypersonic91@yahoo.com}</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The film follows three young men and their time spent in the French suburban " ghetto , " over a span of twenty - four hours . , a , , an , and , a black boxer , have grown up in these French suburbs where high levels of diversity coupled with the racist and oppressive police force have raised tensions to a critical breaking point . During the riots that took place a night before , a police officer lost his handgun in the ensuing madness , only to leave it for to find . Now , with a newfound means to gain the respect he deserves , vows to kill a cop if his friend dies in the hospital , due the beating he received while in police custody.b4arr2y</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > As and his twelve - year - old daughter , , sail to , , their vessel , encounters a shipwreck with a sole survivor , the young , floating among the wreckage . finds and hides a gold medallion she found around the unconscious 's neck , fearing he would be accused of piracy . She then glimpses a ghostly pirate ship ( the ) , disappearing into the mist . Eight years later of the is promoted to . At his ceremony , he proposes to . Before she is able to answer , her over - tightened corset causes her to faint and fall off the rampart , tumbling into the bay . The medallion she is wearing emits a mysterious pulse through the water . Meanwhile , pirate has arrived in to commandeer a ship . Seeing fall , he rescues her , but recognizes him as the notorious pirate and he is arrested . He escapes and ducks into a shop where he encounters Will , now a 's apprentice and self - taught expert swordsman . Following a sword fight with , is knocked unconscious and jailed , set to be hanged the next day . That night , is besieged by the , answering the medallion 's mysterious call . is captured and invokes an agreement ensuring one 's safety until meeting and negotiating with the opposing side . Not wishing to reveal that she 's the 's daughter , tells her surname is . She negotiates for the pirates to cease the attack on in exchange for the medallion . agrees but , employing a loophole in their agreement , keeps prisoner , believing she is the key to breaking an ancient curse they are under . When refuses to take immediate action , , who loves , persuades to help him rescue her in exchange for freeing him from jail . agrees only after learning 's last name is . After commandeering the and Will recruit a crew in with help from 's old friend , , a former boatswain in the . They set sail for de , a mysterious island knows the pirates will go to in order to break the curse . While on route , Will learns about 's past . He was once the captain of the , but when he shared the bearings to a hidden chest of Aztec gold coins , instigated a mutiny and marooned on an island . escaped three days later . The pirates found and spent the treasure , but soon learned it was cursed and had turned them into near - immortal skeletal beings whose true forms are only revealed in moonlight . The curse can only be lifted when every coin and each pirate 's blood is returned to the chest . " " , 's only supporter , sent a coin to his son , , believing the crew should remain cursed for what they did to . had tied to a cannon and thrown overboard , only to realize later that his blood is also needed to break the curse ; a relative must now take his place . In a cave full of treasure on , , believing is 's child , anoints the last coin with her blood and drops it into the chest , unsurprisingly , the curse remains unbroken . Reaching the island , Will suspects may betray him and knocks him out . He rescues , and they escape to the . barters with saying he will reveal 's real child in exchange for the . 's negotiations come to naught , however , when the pursues the , sinking her and taking the crew captive . Will reveals that he is 's son and demands that and the crew be freed , or he will shoot himself and fall overboard , lost forever . agrees but craftily applies another loophole and maroons and on a deserted island ( the same island was on ten years before ) and throws 's crew into the brig . Will is taken to for the ritual . On the island , discovers the truth behind how really got off the island . The island that was imprisoned on was used as a cache by rum runners , who are long since out of business . burns an abandoned cache of rum to create a signal fire that is spotted by . She convinces to rescue Will by accepting his earlier marriage proposal . Returning to , sets an ambush outside the cave while goes inside and persuades to form an alliance . He tells him to delay breaking the curse until after they have taken the and killed the crew . then removes a coin from the chest , rendering himself immortal . But whatever 's actual intent is , his plan goes awry when orders his crew to infiltrate the from underwater . infiltrates the , frees 's crew and destroys the two pirates guarding it . She tries to enlist the crew 's help , but they refuse and make off with the while heads to the island to aid . saves and together they destroy the three cursed pirate guards while , immortal , reveals his true allegiance and battles . tosses his bloodied coin to , who returns the last two medallions to the chest , adding his own blood to his , breaking the curse . then shoots in the heart with the shot he had saved for ten years . No longer immortal , the wounded falls dead . Realizing they are no longer cursed , the now - mortal pirates surrender to the navy . Back in , is about to be executed . Believing deserves to live , Will rescues him . Both are quickly captured , but lends her support and declares her love for . Will is granted yet another pardon ( having been previously cleared of stealing the Interceptor ) and is allowed to marry with the blessing of and . escapes by leaping ( falling ) from the fort and into the bay . His crew , who escaped with the , rescues him and makes him . is impressed enough to allow him one day 's head start before giving pursuit.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The opening scene is of a man who has presumably been tortured by some French military personnel . The commander ( played by ) enters and tells the man to put on a French uniform . The man sheds a tear . He is obviously being forced into something he does nt want to do . In the next scene you have the commander again speaking to some young men who are hidden in a wall . is obviously going to be a main character . We see him running through the streets . Some French young men trip him . is a bit of a hot head and smashes the French boys face . We see a man in a prison being beheaded with the guillotine . witnesses this . Cut to ( played by ) being approached by a young boy with a note . He is given instructions on how to carry out a terrorist plot . He is tricked into shooting a French officer but the gun was empty . He meets one of the leaders of the resistance movement , the . In the next scene a drunken man is beaten by a bunch of little kids . In the next scene shoots a middle - aged man . A FLN wedding is performed . The put them in charge of civic affairs but it seemed like a religious wedding . appears to be among a group of young men who infiltrate the police headquarters and kill several police personnel . This is only the beginning of a series of attacks against the police . There are casualties on both sides . The women use their outward signs of piety ( burkas ) to hide weapons . A group of women dress up like western women . Bombs are distributed . The women go into the French sectoran area that looks as though it may have been pulled out of with fashionably dressed people , sidewalk cafs and people enjoying their leisure time . The French respond to all of the Terrorist activities with a show of force . For a moment the commandant looks like an salesman describing what is exactly like a multilevel marketing scheme in his explanation of a terrorist cell . The FLN is ordered to strike but the have a hidden agenda to find out whom the resistance fighters might be . The French captain is very cleaver to know that the insurrection would come after the terrorist bombings . Another bombing at a crowded horse race : Some of the French adults attack an Algerian child . There are two scenes with reporters asking questions . In the first one a high - level resistance fighter is questioned . In the second , the captain is confronted with some difficult questions . One of the things they are asked about is if they use torture . The captain answers in a diplomatic manner and then the audience sees several acts of brutal torture with the as the victims . In the closing scene we see the captain negotiating with the resistance fighters who want a written promise that they will have a fair trial if they surrender . The fighters ask him to send it up in a basket . The resistance fighters send a basket containing a bomb . It explodes killing or injuring at least one soldier . is captured but is still at large . The closing scene shows with his friends . They hear soldiers coming and all but the woman hide in the wall - hiding place . The French soldiers plant a bomb outside the hiding place . We saw this scene before at the beginning of the movie . Apparently the we saw in the opening scene who shed a tear led the to . The bomb explodes . The final scene takes place some time later in 1960 . There is a riot going on with soldiers shooting into the crowds . The film ends with the captain narrating that on 2 , 1962 a new nation of was > 

 < synopsis > After serving four years in prison for killing a man , hotheaded ( ) heads back to the family farm in . On his way he meets ( ) , a former preacher who has lost his faith . The pair find the farm deserted ; 's share cropping family was evicted . is reunited with his family at his uncle 's farm , only to discover the family must also leave that farm the next day . The extended family of eight ( plus ) packs up their belongings onto an old truck and head to to look for work . Shortly after leaving , ( ) dies of a stroke and the family buries him along the roadside . Money is tight ; they have trouble affording 15 cents for a loaf of bread . They are warned that there is little work in . ( ) dies just before the family reaches the border . They arrive at an itinerate camp populated with hungry children . A man and sheriff come to the camp promising work but wo n't say how much they will be paid . A local man at the camp warns the others and the sheriff wants to arrest the man . The man runs away and the sheriff shoots at him , killing a bystander . knocks out the sheriff and flees . The family leaves the camp and arrives at a farm that needs workers . is wary . The farm is surrounding by a barbed - wire fence with plenty of armed guards . The family settles in a shack and picks peaches for five cents a box , earning barely enough to feed the family . After dinner , takes a walk and encounters in a camp just outside the farm . is helping to lead a labor strike against the farm . Thugs from the farm kill and kills one of the attackers . is hit in the face with a club , leaving a big gash . The family loads up the truck again , hiding under a mattress . They head north , and stay at a government camp . Life is better . The camp has toilets , showers and is run by camp inhabitants . Warned ahead of time , the camp men stop thugs from starting a fight at the night dance that would provide an excuse for the local sheriff to take control of the camp . The sheriff arrives at the camp looking for . vows to his mother , ( ) , that he will fight injustice wherever he finds it , and heads off into the night . She worries that she will never see him again . The family hears of work and heads north and is hopeful about their future.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > This heartwarming true story is an American adaptation of a Japanese tale about a loyal dog named . This very special friend would accompany his master to the train station every day and return each afternoon to greet him after work . Sadly his master goes to work one day , but dies at work and never returns to the station . faithfully returns to the same spot at the station that evening , and every day until the last day of his life , to wait for his beloved master . During his daily visits , touches the lives of many who work near and commute through the train station square . He teaches the local people love , compassion and above all , unyielding loyalty . Today , a bronze statue of sits in his waiting spot outside the station in as a permanent reminder of his devotion and love.(NOTE : There is also a bronze statue of now at the location in where this movie was filmed . It can be viewed on by visiting 1 , , > 

 < synopsis > The film commences with a portrait of society 's caste divide , with the police checking the caste of detainees to determine who should be released . Only inmates from the upper and middle castes get released . The police blame people from lower caste accusing them of perpetrating crimes in multiple pending cases.[6 ] and are a couple from the tribe who labor in the fields of upper - caste men to control rat infestation and catch venomous snakes . Rajakannu is called to a rich man 's dwelling to catch a snake that sneaked inside a room . The next day , a case of burglary is reported when the wife of the man reports missing jewellery pieces from her closet and raises doubt on . The police invade Rajakannu 's home to find evidence . Rajakannu had left the town earlier for work . During the invasion , the police brutally beat and unlawfully detains his pregnant wife . The police arrest other relatives , 's brother , , his sister and his brother - in - law , and torture them to confess the whereabouts of . The police find and imprison him . They brutally torture him to confess the crime but releases his wife . Later , is informed that all three men in detention are absconding and police threaten her furthermore to tell them about their whereabouts . , who teaches adults from tribe , gets to know about , a lawyer who fights cases for tribal communities , and manages to convince him to seek justice for . After listening to the narration of all events that happened until then from , files a habeas corpus case in the court . The public attorney , in defence of the police , produces eye - witnesses to concoct a story that and the other two indeed absconded from jail . Finding gaps in the eye - witnesses ' statements , uncovers that they were committing perjury and asks the court to investigate two police officers - , a casteist cop and constable . Advocate general takes over the case and in defence of the police , claims that the three accused have fled to when , the employer of , acknowledges that informed him through a phone call that he fled to after committing robbery . In retort , manages to discover that the three cops in question went to to make a phone call to which admits , that he mimicked the voice of . and find dead in the middle of a road near the border of . Both believe that did not die due to a car accident , rather due to lock - up murder . Chandru consults the doctor who operated on . The doctor tells him that the cause of death was due to the breaking of the ribcage , but theorises that this could be caused by a car running over him . Veerasamy confesses to Ram that died in lock up custody . called after the death . tells that he should stage that both escaped and leave on the road making everyone believe that he died due to a car accident . and were transferred to another jail in . After hearing this , the lawyer tells them to act like they do not know anything in court . Chandru checks the call history of the police station and tells the court that a call to 's residence was made at 9:10 pm , which does not match with 's statement . Chandru asks the court for more time to investigate , which they allow . , , and the tribe go around the city protesting for justice . Chandru connects the dots and finds that indeed called , but the police coerced him to make the call . finds and and they tell the court about the torture all three of them went through and how the cops killed Rajakannu . , an , says the cops took a bribe from the real thief . also says that on the road where 's corpse was found , there were a set of marks . There were also footprints that matched 's and 's footprints . After hearing these shreds of evidence , the court announces the verdict : the cops who killed Rajakannu should be arrested , will get three lakhs and half a ground land as compensation while , and get two lakhs each . tearfully thanks Chandru for his help and attends the inauguration of 's new house , fulfilling Rajakannu 's dream to get a new house.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > is one of the rebellious youth who has been politically active as a university student and became a left - wing journalist in the 70 's , despite his father 's expectations of him becoming an agricultural engineer and taking control of their family farm in an Aegean village . On the dawn of 12 , 1980 , when a merciless military coup hits the country , they can not find access to any hospital or a doctor and his wife dies while giving birth to their only child , . After a long - lasting period of torture , trials , and jail time , returns to his village with 7 - 8 years old , knowing that it will be hard to correct things with his father , Huseyin.Ali > 

 < synopsis > The film opens in the harsh streets of , where a young man named and his pal are speeding down the road . In the backseat of their car lies 's dog , , a rottweiler who 's bleeding all over the seat . is freaking out , not just because he has to take to a veterinarian , but he and are also being chased by some thugs in a yellow truck , shooting at them . Eventually , loses them , but wrecks his car at an intersection . This wreck sets the stage for the rest of the plot . We then cut back a few days , where we see a punk named submitting his dog into the back alley dogfights , held by overweight thug , known as " " . 's dog wins the fight , killing the other dog , and collects an easy 20,000 pesos . is feeling so high and mighty that he decides to let his winning dog loose on some strays , but is stopped when a vagrant named pulls out a machete , causing and his pals to walk away . Instead , sees 's rottweiler , , wandering the streets , and fully aware of this , he lets his dog loose on it . We then see a rundown home , where lives with his mother , his brother , , and 's wife , . is secretly in love with , and despises , who beats and cheats on her . works as cashier at a local supermarket and is constantly out of money , so he ca n't pay for diapers or milk for the baby , which frustrates . To earn a little extra cash , and his buddy hold - up gas stations , dugstores and groceries . One day , says , he will rob a bank , and get all the money he needs . eventually shows up at 's , and tells him that killed 's dog . runs up to , covered in blood , and sits by his master . Suddenly , drives up ( in the yellow truck ) and demands that give him the money he will lose now that his dog is dead ; alternatively , can lend to him . refuses , but threatens him and says that owes him . just laughs as drives away . This gives an idea . He decides to submit into the local dogfights , and talks to . After seeing win a fight quickly , agrees to let participate , and says that is good for eight fights . Every time there 's a fight , enters a new dog , and everytime , kills it . Soon , is raking in some serious cash . It is now that he asks to go away with him , to the border where they could open a little shop and live together with 's baby . politely refuses , saying her love is for . However , does confide in that she is pregnant again , and if finds out , he 'll be very angry . promises not to tell . One night , goes to the drugstore that works at , and buys some supplies for the baby . gets annoyed , claiming that he can provide for his own child , and threatens . tells that he 's not afraid of him , and headbutts him in the face , making 's nose bleed . When gets home , he beats the crap out of . After winning more money from 's fights , keeps pushing to go away with him . He even tries to make passes at her , but she keeps brushing him away . Finally , however , gives in , and she and embark on an affair . He asks her what she 's going to name her unborn child . She says if it 's a girl , then would be nice . suggests his own name if it 's a boy , but does not respond to that . Soon , begins to catch on about where 's money comes from , and insists on having half of what gets , since is technically 's dog . refuses . then pulls out a gun , points it at , and fires . jumps , but the gun is empty . then demands half of the earnings . A few days later , notifies that has a Class - A fighting dog , and that he challenges to a private fight , with no outside bets , for a cool 40,000 . Octavio accepts , but asks for a favor . The favor , as it turns out , is getting rid of , so , after work one night , is jumped by 's thugs , taken to the middle of nowhere , and beaten to an inch of his life . This scene plays simultaneously with and having sex on top of the washing machine . then asks her to come away with him , that weekend , since he 's about to hit a big score . The night before the fight , though , learns that has left , with and the baby . searches his things , and finds that most of his winnings are gone as well . The next day , he and scrounge up about 20,000 . While is counting the money , is watching a talk show , featuing a beautiful young model named ( This comes into play later).Octavio and go the fight , and even though they have just 20,000 instead of the initial 40,000 , agrees , and the fight begins . is doing some serious damage to the other dog , when suddenly , pulls out a gun and shoots . freaks out , and tells to do something , but just claims that this is between them . and carry to their car , and put him in the backseat . tells to start the car and keep it running , then walks back inside , and stabs in the stomach . then runs back to his car , and speeds away , being pursued by 's thugs . This is where the wreck occurs . The next story involves the model , , who was seen earlier . She has just finished the talk show , and is being escorted by a dashing older movie star , who is rumored to be her boyfriend . He leads her to a nicely furnished apartment , with all of her things and a nice view of an advertisement on a billboard with her picture on it . finds this rather spooky , until her real boyfriend , an older man named , surprises her . He 's bought the apartment for them , with everything he had , and left his wife and two daughters for the much younger . When she runs to embrace him , part of the floor gives under her heels . has also brought her dog , a little terrier ( I think ) named . Their dinner is complete , except for the wine , which goes to get . She 's in her car with , and when she pulls into a certain intersection , she is blindsided by . is rushed to a hospital , where learns from her doctor that 's right leg has almost been completely crushed , but it 's salvageable . , however , survived the crash without a scratch on him . is finally allowed to go home , but she grows bored of being alone while is at work . One day , while she is playing fetch with , the ball rolls into the hole in the floor , and climbs in to find it . calls him back , but he does n't come . When comes home five hours later , still has n't come back , and is growing worried . In the middle of the night , can hear\\nRichie scratching and whimpering . She tells to go rescue , but has no success . It is during this period of time that and 's relationship grows strained . She is constantly nagging at him for not trying to rescue , and he is having second thoughts about leaving his wife . One night , they have an enormous fight , with the sounds of trying to escape in the background . The next morning , tells he 'll be home in a few hours . says she does n't care if he never comes back at all . That night , comes home , but has locked him out of their bedroom . , not in the mood for a fight , decides to sleep on the couch . Later into the night , he demands to be let back in . He finally breaks down the door , and finds lying on the floor , unconscious . rushes her to the hospital , where her doctor explains that her leg eventually became infected with gangrene and had to be amputated . goes home that night , and after hearing , tears apart the floor , until he finds the poor little dog , lying unconscious . The sounds he and had been hearing were actually some rats that inhabited the building . finally comes home , and is very upset . She goes to the window and takes 's hand . The advertisement that had once had her picture on it is now gone , and the billboard is now up for rental . The final story involves the vagrant , . wanders the streets and collects the city 's strays . Also , he is a part - time hitman . Early in the film , he shot a businessman in a restaurant in broad daylight . Later , he is reading the newspaper about the murder , and the paper states that no suspects have been found . On another page , reads the obituary of a woman . He begins to tear up , and goes to the funeral . He stands and watches the service from afar . An older woman at the funeral sees him , and escorts the 's daughter away . Then , the woman confront , and tells him to go away . It is revealed that the woman is his sister - in - law , and the young girl was his estranged daughter , who thinks that is dead . Through some explanations from a crooked cop , we learn that used to be a professor , but one day he went mad and joined the guerrillas . He left his wife and daughter and eventually was captured and served time in prison . When the cop found him , was nothing more than a wino , but the cop hired to do some hits , and was so good , that the cop keeps sending business his way . A new assignment comes up , and it involves a young businessman who wants his partner dead . asks for 100,000 upfront , and demands another 50,000 once the job is done . then begins to follow the partner around . One day , while standing at the corner of a street , sees two cars collide ( and ) . rushes over to 's car , and helps out . has broken his leg , and has some gashes to his head , but is killed . He also swipes 's money and wallet and even takes the wounded back to his hideaway . Chivo nurses Cofi back to health . He also makes several attempts to establish contact with his daughter , but nothing comes of it . He even breaks into her apartment when she is not there , and steals a graduation picture of her , her mother , and her stepfather . goes to a photo booth , takes some pictures of his shaggy and weathered face , and places his photo over the face of the stepfather . As he passes the photo booth , sees , with and their baby . finally decides to rob the bank with his buddy , and is almost successful , until an off - duty cop rushes in and shoots , killing him . At his funeral , , now bald with cuts on his head and being supported by crutches , confronts , and tells her that he is leaving that weekend , and that he 'll wait for her . says no , that does n't get it , and finally declares that the unborn child will be named . A few days later , waits at the bus station for her , but she never shows . does not get onto the bus . One day , comes home and finds , with blood all over him . rushes to the back of his hideaway and finds his other dogs are dead , killed by . is so torn up about this , he pulls out his gun and is about to shoot , but ca n't bring himself to do it . He burns the remains of the other dogs , and decides to carry out the hit . He apprehends the partner at a , and takes him back to his hideaway . Chivo ties the partner up against a pole , and leaves him there for a few days , yet does not kill him . Chivo then contacts the businessman and tells him to come to the hideaway . The businessman shows up with the rest of the money , but is shocked to see his partner still alive . quickly turns the tables , and ties the businessman up as well . then learns that the two men are not only partner , but brothers as well . The next morning , awakes and shaves and cuts his hair . He steals the businessman 's suit , and leaves the two there , still tied up loosely , but places a loaded gun between them , so they will kill each other . He stops at the photo booth and takes another picture , this time with his cleaned up face . takes and they go back to 's daughter 's apartment . Using the businessman 's cell phone , calls his daughter 's phone and leaves a message , saying how sorry he is that he was n't there for her , and that he loves her . He then takes out the graduation photo , and puts the new photo on top of the old one . He then sells the businessman 's to a chopshop , and wanders into the unknown , with by his side.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The film begins with a female voiceover : " Last night I dreamt I went to again " , to images of a ruined country manor . The heroine is a very young ( and nameless ) woman ( ) , a paid companion to the wealthy but obnoxious ( ) . The heroine meets the aristocratic widower ( ) ( ) in . They fall in love , and within two weeks they are married . takes his new bride to , his country house in , . The housekeeper , ( ) , is domineering and cold , and is obsessed with the great beauty , intelligence and sophistication of the first eponymous preserves her former bedroom as a shrine . 's sleazy cousin ( ) appears at the house when is away . The new is intimidated by her responsibilities and begins to doubt her relationship with her husband . The continuous reminders of overwhelm her ; she believes that is still deeply in love with . She also discovers that her husband sometimes becomes very angry at her for apparently innocent actions . Trying to be the perfect wife , the young convinces Maxim to hold a costume party as he did with . The heroine tries to plan her own costume , but suggests she copy the beautiful outfit in the portrait of , an ancestor . At the party , when the costume is revealed to he is appalled ; wore the same outfit at their ball a year ago , shortly before she died . The heroine confronts , who tells her she can never take 's place , and almost manages to convince her to jump to her death . A sudden commotion reveals that a ship is sinking . The heroine rushes outside , where she hears that during the rescue a sunken boat has been found with 's body in it . Maxim admits that he had earlier misidentified another body as 's , in order to conceal the truth . At the very beginning of their marriage had told she intended to continue the promiscuous and perverse sex life she had led before the marriage . He hated her but they agreed to an arrangement : she would act as the perfect wife and hostess in public , and he would ignore 's privately conducted affairs . Rebecca grew careless and complacent in her dealings , including an ongoing affair with her cousin . One night , informed that she was pregnant with 's child . During the ensuing heated argument she fell , hit her head and died . took the body out in a boat which he then scuttled . Shedding the remnants of her girlish innocence , 's wife coaches her husband on how to conceal the mode of 's death from the authorities . In the police investigation , deliberate damage to the boat points to suicide . shows a note from Rebecca which seems to indicate she was not suicidal . then tries to blackmail , but tells the police . Maxim is now under suspicion of murder . The investigation then focuses on 's secret visit to a doctor ( ) , which assumes was due to her illicit pregnancy . However , the coroner 's interview with the doctor reveals that was mistaken in believing herself pregnant ; instead she had a late - stage cancer . The doctor 's evidence persuades the coroner to render a finding of suicide . Only ( 's best friend and manager of the estate ) , , and his wife will know the full story : that lied to about being pregnant with another man 's child in order to goad him into killing her , an indirect means of returns home from to , he finds the manor on fire , set alight by the deranged . The second and the staff manage to escape the blaze , but Danvers dies in the > 

 < synopsis > It is about of 1948 in a small northern town . As the film opens , ( ) is using a pipe cutter to cut the tops off of parking meters . He is drinking , possibly drunk , but not violent . When the police arrive , he is peacefully arrested . and three other men arrive at a rural prison where they serve on a road gang performing hard labor . When he arrives at the prison , the warden reads his record . He remarks that had been in the , attained the rank of , was awarded several medals , but was discharged as a private . Something he did got him busted back down to the same rank at which he entered the . is sentenced to two years . ( ) is clearly the leader of the prisoners . He is uneducated and illiterate , but smarter , stronger , bigger , and does not hesitate to exercise his power over them . Most of the prisoners willingly submit to , but does not . There is no open opposition to , just a casual refusal to change his behavior in order to please others . Nevertheless , sees this as a threat to his power and dominance . The men leave at sunset and perform over 12 hours daily of grueling hard labor under intense heat and humidity on the side of the road cutting grass with a sickle or shoveling dirt . One of the new prisoners passes out the first day and another one tries to get out of the detail by sweeping , which was a trick played on him . makes it the first day , but exhausted and barely able to get back into the truck . At the end of the first day for the new men , , the one who tried to get out of the hard labor by sweeping , is made to sleep in the box the first night , a cramped isolation unit outside to learn a lesson to not challenge the guards . After says something that takes as a challenge to his authority , arranges for he and to have a boxing match . Being much larger , simply pounds into a pulp , but will not give up , or stay down on the ground . What begins as a boxing match with enthusiastic prisoners and guards watching slowly turns into a sad spectacle . Prisoners begin to plead with to lay down and refuse to get back up , and eventually himself pleads with to simply stop fighting back , but will not stop . The prisoners begin to walk away , unable to watch the sad scene any longer . himself wants the fight to end , and at one point has to catch the beaten and exhausted from falling down , carrying him across his shoulder and gently setting him on the ground , only to have use what little strength he has left to tap with one last punch . Finally , even can not continue . The only men who are still watching are the guards and the warden , but the warden seems concerned about 's stubbornness and the guards remain indifferent . becomes the prisoners ' hero , and even is now respectful of during a card game that night of having tricked a fellow opponent on betting with a bad hand dealt , giving him the name " . "On the chain gang , encourages the other prisoners , by his own attitude and energy , to excel at their menial tasks . This not only encourages camaraderie among the prisoners , it deprives the guards of a stick to hold over the prisoners ' heads . The prisoners are forced to shovel sand over a freshly tarred road , and they perform the job so quickly and with such a sense of competition that they complete the job early , and thus by default earn a few hours of relaxation , because there is no more road on which to work . On a , 's mother comes to visit him , visibly ill and dying of cancer or emphysema and still chain - smoking , and it is clear that gets his independent streak from her . He admired her ability to live life on her own terms , and has tried to emulate that , but with much different results . During one very hot and rainy night , decides out of the blue that he can eat 50 eggs . Most of the other prisoners oppose and that it 's impossible or will kill him , but begins to take bets . barely succeeds at it and collects all the money from bets . Soon after , receives a telegram that his mother has died . The warden uses the death of 's mother as an excuse to lock him in " the box , " solitary confinement in a hot wooden shed . The warden claims that men will often run away when their relatives die , so he locks up until after 's mother is buried . This has the opposite effect , and promptly escapes after being released from solitary . is later caught , after mailing a picture and magazine back to his former fellow prisoners . He is double - chained , but escapes a second time . Again , he is recaptured . While is becoming the " hero " of his fellow prisoners , it is a role he does not want . He admonishes them to " stop feeding off me , " to stop living life vicariously through his acts . The guards and warden determine to break 's will . They force him to dig and bury , then re - dig and re - bury , a ditch . He is beaten and tormented , until he finally begs to spare him from the warden and guards . They take this as a sign that he is finally a broken man , and himself later admits that it did break him . A few days later , the guards have now made a trustee . Nonetheless , when he is later given an opportunity , he seizes it and escapes again , stealing one of the prison trucks to make his get - away . This time , decides to go with . Only later , after their escape , does weigh out the consequences . He had only two years left on his sentence , but now - if caught - will probably have many more years in prison . wants to team up with , but tells him that he wants to go alone . has always been an individual , not a conventional leader , and does not want to take on that role now . goes into a church , after being completely irreverent to through the entire film , and asks to help him escape . But the warden and guards arrive , and when mocks them from the church window , he is shot . The local police want to take to the hospital , but the warden insists that they take him back to prison instead . It is clear that will not make it that far , but the warden heads off with in his car . The one guard who always wears sunglasses is attacked by , and though is subdued , he managed to take off the guard 's mirror - like sunglasses ( and the warden runs over them with his the final scene , is regaling the prisoners with stories of 's final moments , and it is clear that is dead . He is the true anti - hero , never wanting to be anybody 's role model , just wanting to live life on his own terms . But like the guard 's sunglasses , managed to unmask the injustice and hypocrisy of the system in which he was confined . Basically , he gave up his life over a parking meter , but in the final analysis he could not be broken by the > 

 < synopsis > in during the 1930s prior to , the film begins with a local Korean woman named - preparing to move away from her home and move into the estate of a Japanese heiress , . Sook - is taken on a long ride until she reaches the large estate in the countryside . A woman greets her and gives her a tour of the grounds including an annex which has been furnished into a library . Sook - is told that she wo nt sleep in the servants quarters but near the of the house as she is her handmaiden . She calls - ' ' and tells her that the lady is often tasked with reading for the master ( her uncle ) and that he loves books . Sook - is then showed her room which is just across from the 's bedroom . When left alone , Sook - tries to peek into the room but a loud noise scares her back to her tiny cot . Later in the night , Sook - awakens to hear the screaming . She rushes into her bedroom and comforts her . says she had a nightmare and tells - that her aunt had hung herself from the big cherry tree and on moonless nights , her aunts ghost dangles from the branch . Sook - proves to be a good handmaiden as she comforts the by feeding her sake and singing to her . Sook - tells us ( through voice - over ) that we think she is a Korean handmaiden named but she 's really Sook - , a pickpocket raised by a woman who teaches children how to steal and commit forgeries . In a flashback , we see the house takes in abandoned newborns and sells them to . A man enters the house of thieves and tells them about an interpreter who bribed his way into a translating job for the high officials . He helps annex and then gets naturalized so he can marry the daughter of a Japanese noble . He builds a mansion , filled with books , and invites Japanese collectors to his library to hold readings of rare books and auction them off . Some of the books , he needs to sell but does n't want to lose possession so he hired this man ( telling the story ) to create forgeries he has convinced the nobles he is from . The collector 's wife died with no children and her sister has died but his wife 's niece is still alive and employed to perform book readings for her uncle . Now an orphan , this woman is rich she has 1.5 million yen in cash and 300,000 yen in bonds -- and the man who calls himself plans to make her fall in love with him and after marrying her , hell declare her insane and have her locked up in a madhouse thus inheriting her fortune . He wants - to work as her handmaiden so she can persuade her to fall in love . Her uncle also wants to marry her for her money but if Sook - can convince her to marry the , give her 50,000 yen and the dresses and jewelry . Sook - demands 100,000 yen . Sook - goes to the estate to meet with the staff , to convince them to hire her . The women who work on staff steal her shoes as a prank which angers her because it will make her look bad . She is amazed to see how beautiful is . Sook - gives her a reference letter from the last woman she worked for but in reality , its a forgery by the man who is pretending to be . He has written it in , which - ca n't read or write . He has told Sook - what the letter says " A maid is like a pair of chopsticks " . Her presence is little noted , but her absence causes much distress . claims she has a headache from all the reading she has had to do for her uncle and asks Sook - to read it . Sook - struggles to do so from memory , claiming it says she 's like a spoon and then finally admits she is illiterate and ca n't even read in . said she does n't care if - curses or steals but she does n't ever want to be lied to . She shows Sook - a picture of her mother and asks if she is as beautiful . Sook - tells her that she has heard the say he dreams of her face in bed , her first attempt at planting a seed of a relationship . gives Sook - some shoes and then leaves to go to reading practice , which shell do alone . Sook - goes through all the dresses to see what clothes shell inherit after the woman is locked up . She finds Wa balls . After trying on hats , she finds a rope in a hatbox . Sook - goes outside and looks up at the cherry tree the 's aunt was said to have hung herself from . Sook - finds reading in the library with her uncle . She tries to approach but is told not to go past the snake . A gate is rolled closed , locking her out . She notices a statue of a snake on the ground , creating a boundary of limitations which she is n't allowed to cross . Back in her room , Sook - bathes , giving her a lollipop which she says she used on children to help them associate bath time with sweetness . complains one of her teeth is sharp . Sook - grabs a thimble and begins shaving it down . The two exchange sexual energy while this is going on . Sook - admires 's naked breasts . arrives at the estate to help with forgeries and requests the 's handmaiden to run an errand for him . Sook - and the discuss their plan in private . Sook - tells him the is and wo nt take the hint that he wants sex , even if he pulls on her nipples . says - has to put it into her head that the is much happier since he arrived . He also gives her a gift to send along . Sook - presents the gift sapphire earrings . Sook - is excited that they 'll be hers when the is sent away to the madhouse . She also convinces that the earrings are actually spinel . arranges for - to be dressed up which is a new experience for - . finishes off the look with the sapphire earrings . They button each others dresses up which is depicted in a very sexual way with Sook - openly longing to touch her . Sook - asks if is planning to marry her uncle . points out that 's what he raised her for , knowing he 'd need access to her money one day . Eventually he will put his entire library up for auction because he ca nt afford any more books . The paints with , trying to be flirtatious . Sook - watches , feeling sorry for for being duped . He tells - a peach is ripe which is the signal for her to start convincing the that she s falling in love with the . After he leaves , Sook - claims the 's cheeks have grown flushed since he arrived but the is n't really convinced . and - have a personal conversation on the grounds , about how the 's mother died in childbirth and its like she strangled her as punishment for being born . Sook - takes this to heart and tells her no baby is guilty of being born and that her mother would probably have been very happy to have given life to her . This surprises and touches the . The arrives and steals the away , sending Sook - to run errands so they can be alone . Not wanting to leave with the , Sook - rushes to grab things but when she returns , she sees the clothed mounting the clothed , which makes her terribly jealous . Now - harbors anger at . At night , the servants bell is and - is called into the 's bedroom . She asks Sook - why she did n't greet her when she got back from her reading . Sook - is obviously still bitter that is falling for the but claims she simply fell asleep . The says she can feel a nightmare coming on and suggests Sook - sleep in bed with her . After a while , she tells - that the count asked to elope with her when her uncle leaves to visit his gold mine . The says without a mother , she s never been told what men want . Sook - teaches her how to kiss by demonstrating on her . Then she begins to make love to her under the context of showing her what it will be like when she makes love to the . The two women end up having sex for the first time , both claiming it is simply an instruction although they both seem to be in love with the other . The next time the is painting with , he orders Sook - to find another job to do . Sook - follows suit but then stops short , saying she has no other job except to look after the . Outside the grounds , the yells at Sook - for not helping him with his plan . He puts Sook - hands on his crotch and tells her to feel how much he wants her fortune and tells her he s not going to let her fuck it up . Sook - threatens to tell her that he s just a pickpocket but he threatens , in return , to tell her that - is a Korean farmhand and shaman . Sook - ca nt return home empty - handed , not providing for all the people who have taken her in since she was a little girl . Sook - responds by saying has no one on earth and if he frightens her , shell close up like a clam . She adds not to ever put her hand on his tiny joke of a cock again . Now - follows the plan accordingly , telling that she ( the ) is falling for the . But the says she 's fallen in love with somebody else . Nonetheless , agrees to marry the if - can go with them to . The leaves the estate to visit his mine while the pretends to leave but secretly hides so he can sneak off with . As soon as her uncle is gone , leaves with the and - on a ferry to . Once there , and the are married . The next morning , Sook - stops by their room and finds blood on 's sheets , alluding to having lost her virginity . The watches the two women together . When he 's not looking , Sook - kisses . By the end of the week , is missing , claiming that he has gone to certify the marriage and convert the inheritance into cash . When he returns , Sook - yells at him for taking her virginity and then leaving her alone . She tells him to hurry up and throw in the madhouse . Two men arrive at the hotel and ask Sook - what treatment she would suggest for . Sook - says she wants her confined to a place where no one can harm her and she can do no harm . The group travels into town , stopping at a mental hospital . Sook - waits with the employees as they tell the they are going to look after her but then they end up grabbing Sook - and taking her into the madhouse . She claims she is not the and they have the wrong woman . The and do nothing to defend Sook - as she struggles . TWOWe now learn about the back story of . As a little girl , she has to put medal balls in her mouth ( reminiscent of balls ) while she is hit repeatedly by her handmaiden for talking back . She is then brought into her room where she 's told there is an ogre who lives outside her room who will burst in and smother her if she ever cries out . The aunt also shares the photo of 's mother that we had seen her show to - . 's aunt instructs her in by reading books which end up being graphic and teaching her words like penis and . Her uncle comes by and grabs both of their faces , suffocating them before letting them go . We now see the young slapping a servant for saying bad things about her in , which she can speak . Her uncle tells her that she has a touch of lunacy that she got from her mother and he will try to teach her so she does n't get sent to a mental hospital . The training consists of her being taught to read from his book collection which is now revealed to be very explicitly sexual books . The young reads from a graphic story and her uncle yells at her lack of articulation . We then see the adult at the readings for collectors , reading from sexually explicit passages . She flashes back to the day of her aunt 's hanging and the servants staring up at her . Meanwhile , the readings continue for the Japanese book collectors and the stories are more and more graphic . She also performs demonstrations of the material for the audience she chokes herself ; she is whipped ; she sits on a wooden puppet and is lifted to the ceiling . The books are auctioned off . One has lost its value because the sexually explicit illustration has been ripped out . Nobody wants to buy the book , figuring that the illustration was necessary to depict what words alone could not . The man who pretends to be is involved in these readings , hired for forgeries . He tells 's uncle how all the women on the estate are attracted to him except for one . He heard that her uncle is engaged to her and suggests to him to go easy on her training or shell be dead inside . and talk over dinner . He tries to tell her he loves her but she knows he 's lying . He admits to being the son of a Korean farmhand and he spent three years learning to paint forgeries so he would have access to her and possess her father 's inheritance . But he realized how smart she was after he met her and has another deal to suggest hell rescue her from her uncle , they 'll split the money . She says she does n't want to marry anyone . He realizes she plans to kill herself but he says all her money would go to a perverted uncle . She points out that he will find them if they eloped and take her to the basement where he tortures people he has brought her there as a young girl and showed her what he did to her aunt . gives her highly concentrated opium and says if she 's ever caught , three drops will make her sleep , five drops will knock her out , and all of it will kill her . They plan to find a handmaiden for her who they will send to a madhouse under 's name . They get rid of her old one after she is caught having sex with the . We now see - 's arrival from 's perspective . When - tries to peek in her room , she bangs against the wall , scaring her . She watches Sook - undress for bed . Then she screams to get Sook - to come , claiming she had a nightmare . reads a letter from telling her to show Sook - her clothes at every opportunity since that is part of what she will receive for helping him out ( if she was n't being duped ) . He points out she wo nt be able to read the letter she 's reading because she 's illiterate . Hence her asking Sook - to read the recommendation out loud she knew she could n't read it . also goes outside and scolds her servants for stealing - 's shoe , saying if she runs away , shell throw them out . In the next flashback , we see Sook - bathing and fixing her tooth but now we see this was followed by inviting Sook - to join her in the tub . When - presents the earrings to , wrote her a letter warning her that - would pretend they were fake because she wants them but they 're actually 's own earrings . He tells her , to keep her from getting suspicious , they should occupy Sook - with the task of trying to convince to marry him and that she should n't fall in love with him too easily . As before , gives Sook - the earrings and admires her when she is dressed up . Also as before , Sook - is very kind towards when she discusses losing her mother in childbirth , leading to feel a companionship towards - . and really do n't like each other and both only tolerate the other to go along with their plan . Sook - now mopes around , angry , watching a flirtatious exchange between and the ; now we hear them openly discussing their dislike for each other . Sook - becomes jealous which notices . As before , when she is away running errands , Sook - rushes back to find a clothed mounting on the grounds . Now we see that they staged that pose just to convince her they were falling in love . We see giving the readings of sexual literature to the Japanese men . She reads about Wa balls . The men applaud . Next , we see the scene again where and - have sex , under the pretext of educating on how to please a man . But now the lesbian sex scene is extended and more graphic , showing both women taking turns orally pleasuring each other ( cunnilingus ) as well as fingering as well as grinding . Sook - tells that she is a natural with performing the sex . A day or two later , yells at , telling her if she scares - , shell close up like a clam . The feels bad about arranging to have - locked up in a madhouse but he tells her that - said was so dense , she would n't know someone wanted sex even if they pulled on her nipples . While it is true Sook - said this early on , it was when she was not fully invested in 's companionship and trying hard to go along with the plan despite her developed attachment . However , it is enough to upset who is now convinced - does n't really have feelings for her . In her room , asks Sook - if she still thinks she should marry the , even if she ( the ) ends up having feelings for someone else . When - says yes , slaps her and shoves her out of her room . Then she grabs the rope that - found in the hatbox earlier and goes to hang herself from the same tree her aunt had , saying she wishes she 'd never been born . ( We 're meant to believe this is why she allows - to be sent to a madhouse despite falling in love with when hanging from the tree , before she can fall , Sook - appears , holding by the legs . She immediately confesses to everything , how she was trying to trick her into marrying the and they were going to send her to the madhouse . Hideko asks , - , are you worried about me ? and - asks how she knows her name since she s pretended to be a handmaiden named . confesses her plan to send Sook - to the madhouse . Now - writes home and tells the woman who raised her to be a thief there is a change of plans and they need her help with a forgery . 's uncle drives away to visit his gold mines . He warns about the basement , meaning if she ever betrays him , he will punish her with torture like he has done to family members before . With him gone , Sook - is finally able to explore the library . She sees the uncle 's collection is all perversely sexual literature . Offended that had been forced to read it , she tears pages and illustrations out of all the books and then dumps them in the indoor ponds underneath the floorboards . The two women are finally free , preparing for to elope , and we see them running through the fields , laughing . Cut to - being put in the madhouse . Instead of sadness , is seemingly unaffected and says she 's hungry . and dine at a nice restaurant , their plan having worked . Meanwhile , Sook - laughs hysterically while eating dinner at the mental hospital . At a photography studio , explains that they 'll replace - 's photo on her with 's so she can take on her identity and can be declared in a mental institution , allowing them to recoup her inheritance without being caught by her uncle . The confesses he might actually like and suggests they get married again , now that she s stolen - 's identity . She inquires whether he feels remorse about having locked Sook - in a madhouse alone but he says she 's and deserves her fate . In the madhouse , a fire is set allowing - to escape . Back at a hotel , dips the opium the gave her into a wine glass . They kiss and he decides he wants to have sex . She drinks from her wine glass , hoping follow suit , but he does n't . She lets him kiss her breasts and then they kiss but he still does n't drink the wine . Finally she drinks from his glass and kisses him , transferring wine from her mouth to his . He then gets really aggressive towards her sexually , citing the books she read out loud that declares women like being taken forcefully . But before he can harm her , he passes out from the opium in the wine . When he wakes up , he is being taken by two thugs somewhere into town . Now - and have reunited . Sook - has taken a picture of herself dressed as a man and uses her forgery skills to replace the photo in 's , taking over his identity . sends a letter to her uncle , telling him that the Japanese who he had been trying to impress for years is actually the son of a Korean farmhand and she drops him off with her uncle as a gift . She also tells him to tell the that , outside of books , no woman likes to be taken by force . Now that he knows he 's been betrayed , the uncle takes the man who pretended to be to his basement and tortures him , cutting off his fingers with a paper trimmer . The asks for a cigarette . The two women go to the train station . The uncle 's goons are there , checking for any women traveling together who are trying to leave town . The women go undetected in two ways ; they buy a ticket to a nearby city and then change it to , paying the difference ; and is currently disguised as a man so they are n't seen as two women . In another flashback , we see that the did n't really take 's virginity . She broke her own hymen with a butter knife , resulting in the blood - saw the next morning . In present day , 's uncle asks about all the details about his niece 's wedding night , exposing that he had a perverted fascination with his young niece and was n't simply after her money . He asks graphic questions about whether he touched her breasts or her vagina . Whether her had many wrinkles and the look of her vaginal secretion . He admits he 's just an old man who likes dirty stories . The ignores him , asking for a cigarette to help his memory , which 's uncle grabs from the 's clothes and he smokes . The two women have made it to the ferry . gets rid of her fake mustache now that they 're safely en route to . Meanwhile , 's uncle cuts off the 's underwear as he lays bleeding from losing his fingers . Before the torture can continue , the says that the cigarettes were filled with mercury and they both are now poisoned from the smoke . The uncle dies . The inhales the air in an effort to kill himself . In the final scene , Sook - and are in their stateroom on the ship as they travel to their new home . Now free , they undress and kiss and have a long sexual experience ( they have more lesbian sex ; but this time they are both clearly affectionate and in love ) . They put the Wa balls in their mouths and then inside each others vaginas . The final shot shows the steamer ship sailing away into the > 

 < synopsis > Seemingly in constant trouble at school , 14 - year - old returns at the end of every day to a drab , unhappy home life . His parents have little money and he sleeps on a couch that 's been pushed into the kitchen . His parents bicker constantly and he knows his mother is having an affair . He decides to skip school and begins a downward spiral of lies and theft . His parents are at their wits ' end , and after he 's stopped by the police , they decide the best thing would be to let face the consequences . He 's sent to a juvenile detention facility where he does n't do much better . He does manage to escape however.garykmcd</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The widowed , retired Austrian naval officer , ( ) has made his Austrian home one of overly restrictive and harshly enforced discipline , one that , most unintentionally , causes his seven children to be underfed when it comes to joy and love . Being a nun living in a convent is similarly restrictive and unfulfilling for ( ) , who breaks rules to try to change it . The reverend mother ( ) decides that , who is not cutting it as a nun , should leave and take on a job as governess at the nearby household in . Through music and various outings , gives the children a taste of a more fulfilling , joyous , life than they have ever known , and they come to love her very dearly . The grows closer to his children , too , coming to understand the value and beauty of the freedoms that has given them . Ironically , the freedom of all to live their lives to the fullest is in danger , for it is 1938 , and is marching into . The is a patriot , passionate about the fulfilling life that has always offered its citizens . In his personal life , the is having a romance with a wealthy , cultivated , and lovely ( ) , but he is becoming more and more captivated by , and is falling in love with her , and she , too , feels growing affection for him . She is a nun , however , and unschooled in dealing with the situaiton . Frightened by the developments , runs back to the convent , where the reverend mother convinces her that she must face , rather than run from , the situation , causing to return to the 's home . It seems , though , that she is too late , learning that the and the have become engaged . The , who had surely concluded that he could never have for a wife , confides to the that he loves , but the admits she had sensed it long ago , and the engagement is called off . The and marry , but an ugly situation befronts them upon return from their honeymoon -- the has been summoned , in a telegram , by the to serve in its navy . Due to the 's unwillingness to serve the , the and resolve to leave , and , after escaping the pursuit of some officers , they set out , with the children , for the mountains of on > 

 < synopsis > It Happened One begins with a rich heiress named sequestered by her father on his yacht , disapproving of her marriage to a famous aviator named . After an argument , she escapes the yacht and swims away . She buys a bus ticket to travel back to to her husband , where she meets an out of work reporter named . Eventually he finds out her true identity from a newspaper article about her escape . He offers to help her get to her destination in exchange for exclusive rights to her story , and secures her cooperation by threatening to turn her in to her father if she does not and share hotel rooms on their trip , pretending to be husband and wife to keep from arousing suspicion . Because she is a married woman , they put up a blanket as a barrier , with referring to it as the walls of . One of the other bus passengers recognizes from an article offering a $ 10,000 reward for her return . While the bus is stranded in mud , the passenger offers to split the money with if he helps him turn in . scares the passenger away by implying that he s a professional criminal looking for $ 1,000,000 in ransom money and then threatens to shoot him when he becomes frightened . and then leave the bus to hitchhike in case the other passenger decides to turn them in to the police.\\nAfter they spend the night sleeping in , gets a driver to stop by flashing one of her legs , who turns out to be a robber who drives off with their possessions . After chasing after him , inexplicably returns with a bloody temple and the mans car . In the meantime , the father reluctantly agrees to allow the marriage to the aviator if his daughter returns . While spending another night in a blanket - partitioned hotel room , throws herself at and proposes that they both be together . seemingly rejects her and after she falls asleep he drives back to in the middle of the night . He sells his story about his love and potential marriage to to his old boss for $ 1000 , so as not to propose to her while broke . Meanwhile , the suspicious manager of the hotel kicks out when she finds out that has left.\\nThinking that hates her , phones her father in order to turn herself in . Her father picks her up with a police escort while is returning just in time to see them drive by . Angry with her , contacts the about reward money . He agrees to go to their home while a real marriage ceremony for and the aviator is to take place . He only comes to collect $ 39.60 for his expenses and not the full $ 10,000 and admits to the father that he loves his daughter . The father starts to like and during the ceremony manages to convince his daughter that really loves her and that she should leave the aviator . runs away during the ceremony , her father pays off the aviator to annul the wedding , and she eventually marries the reporter . The film ends in a hotel room with the " walls of " coming down.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > begins with images of camera equipment and projectors lighting up and projecting dozens of brief cinematic glimpses , including a crucifixion , an erect penis , a tarantula spider , clips from a comedic silent - film reel first seen in 's ( depicting a man trapped in a room , being chased by and ) , and the slaughter of a lamb . The last , and longest , glimpse features a boy who wakes up in a hospital next to several corpses , reading 's A of Our ( " " in the film ) , and caressing a blurry image of and/or 's faces . A young nurse , ( portrayed by ) , is summoned by the head doctor and charged with the care of stage actress ( portrayed by ) , who has , despite the lack of any diagnosed impairment , become mute . The hospital administrator ( portrayed by ) offers her own seaside cottage as a place for to nurse back to health . Though is nearly catatonic when the film begins , she does react with extreme panic upon seeing a Vietnamese monk 's self - immolation on television , and laughs mockingly at 's radio soap opera . As the two women leave the hospital together , reads aloud a letter 's husband has sent her , which includes a photograph of her young son . Together in the administrator 's cottage , begins to relax , though she remains completely silent and non - responsive . speaks constantly to break the silence , at first about books she is reading and trivial matters , then increasingly about her own anxieties and relationship with her fianc , - , who scolds her for lacking ambition " though not with my career , I suppose in some greater way . " constantly compares herself to and begins to grow attached to her . As the act closes , confesses to cheating on her fianc in a mnage  quatre with underage boys . She became pregnant , and had - 's friend abort the baby ; " and that was that " . She is not sure how to process the abortion mentally . is heard to say " You ought to go to bed , or you 'll fall asleep at the table " , but dismisses it as a dream . later denies speaking . Alma drives into town , taking 's letters for the postbox , but parks by the roadside to read what she wrote . She discovers in 's letters that has been analyzing her and " studying " her . Alma returns distraught , accidentally breaks a drinking glass on the footpath , and leaves the shards there to cut . When 's feet start to bleed , her gaze meets 's knowingly , and the film itself breaks apart : the screen flashes white , scratch marks appear up and down the image , the sound rises and screeches , and the film appears to unwind as brief flashes of the prelude reappear for fractions of a second each . When the film resumes , it is following through the house with a thick blur on the lens . The image clears up with a sharp snap when she looks out the window before walking outside to meet , who is weepy and bitter . At lunch , she tells she has been hurt by talking about her behind her back , and begs her to speak . When does not react , the nurse flies into a rage . tries to attack her and chases her through the cottage , but hits her during the ensuing scuffle causing 's nose to start bleeding . In retaliation , grabs a pot of boiling water off the stove and is about to fling it at , but stops after hearing wail " No ! " explains that would n't have spoken had she not feared death . goes to the bathroom , washes her face , and tries to pull herself together . She then goes to and frustrated by her unresponsiveness tells her , " You are inaccessible . They said you were healthy , but your sickness is of the worst kind : it makes you seem healthy . You act it so well everyone believes it , everyone except me , because I know how rotten you are inside . " tries to walk away , but pursues and continues to accost her . flees , and chases her begging for forgiveness . That evening , opens a book she is reading and finds a famous photograph of being arrested in the . stares at details in the photograph , but mostly at the boy with his hands raised . That night , watches sleep , analyzing her face and the scars she covers with makeup . She hears a man yelling outside , and finds 's husband , , in the garden . ( portrayed by ) mistakes for his wife , and despite her repeatedly interjecting with " I 'm not your wife " , delivers a monologue about his love for her and the son they have together ( repeating words he wrote to in the opening act " We must see each other as two anxious children " ) . stands quietly beside the two , holding 's hand , and admits her love for and accepts her role as the mother of 's child . The two make love with sitting quietly next to the bed with a look of panic on her face , and afterward , cries . The image of becomes blurry . The climax of the film comes the next morning ; catches in the kitchen with a pained expression on her face , holding a picture of a small boy . then narrates 's life story back to her , while the camera focuses tightly on 's anguished face : at a party one night , a man tells her " , you have it virtually all in your armory as woman and artist . But you lack motherliness . " She laughs , because it sounds silly , but the idea sticks in her mind , and she lets her husband impregnate her . As the pregnancy progresses , she grows increasingly worried about her stretching and swelling body , her responsibility to her child , the pain of birth , and the idea of abandoning her career . Everyone knows constantly says " Is n't she beautiful ? She has never been so beautiful " , but makes repeated attempts to abort the fetus . After the child is born , she is repulsed by it , and prays for the death of her son . The child grows up tormented and desperate for affection . The camera turns to show 's face , and she repeats the same monologue again . At its conclusion , one half of the face of and the other of 's visage are shown in split screen , such that they appear to have become one face . panics and cries " I 'm not like you . I do n't feel like you . I 'm not Vogler : you are . I 'm just here to help you ! " Alma leaves , and later returns , to find that has become completely catatonic . falls into a strange mood and gashes her arm , forcing 's lips to the wound and subsequently beating her . packs her things and leaves the cottage alone , as the camera turns away from the women to show the crew and director filming the scene.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > is born in a stable a few doors down from the one in which is born , a fact which initially confuses the three wise men who come to praise the baby , as they must put up with 's boorish mother until they realize their mistake . grows up to be an idealistic young man who resents the continuing Roman occupation of , even after learning his father was a - . While attending ' on the , he becomes attracted to a young female rebel , . His desire for and hatred for the lead him to join the 's of , one of many factious and bickering separatist movements , who spend more time fighting each other than the . The group 's cynical leader gives his first assignment as a rebel : an attempt at scrawling some graffiti ( " Romanes eunt domus " , poorly translated for " Go Home " ) on the wall of the governor 's palace . He is soon confronted by a passing Centurion who , in disgust at 's faulty Latin grammar , forces him to write out the grammatically correct message ( " ite domum " ) one hundred times . The walls of the fortress are literally covered in text by dawn . When the Roman guards change shifts at daybreak , the new guards immediately try to arrest . After a series of misadventures , the fugitive winds up in a motley group of mystics and prophets who harangue the passing crowd in a plaza . Forced to come up with something plausible in order to blend in , he babbles pseudo - religious nonsense which quickly attracts a small but intrigued audience . Once the Roman guards have left , tries to put the episode behind him , but has unintentionally inspired a movement ; and a crowd begins to follow him around , with even the slightest unusual occurrence being hailed as a " miracle . " After slipping away from the mob ( who are busy persecuting a " heretic " ) and spending the night with , he discovers that an enormous crowd proclaiming him the has formed outside his 's house . Appalled , is helpless to change the people 's minds , as his every word and action are immediately seized as a point of doctrine . The finally catch the hapless and he is scheduled to be crucified . asks the crowd whom he should pardon , but is fed various " fake " names intended to highlight his strong lisp , much to the their amusement . eventually orders 's release , but in a moment parodying the climax of the film , the various crucified people all claim to be " of " , and the wrong man is released . Abandoned by anyone who might be able to help him , the actual remains hanging in the hot sun , and is told by his fellow sufferers , in song , to " Always Look on the of Life".</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > In 1957 , a large alien robot crashes from orbit near the coast of , with no memory . Shortly after , the wanders off into the mainland . Nine - year - old follows a trail of the forest 's destruction and frees the robot , who is stuck in the power cables of an electrical substation . After being rescued by and befriended by , the follows him back to his house , where he lives with his widowed mother . Upon their return , the attempts to eat the rails off the ties of the nearby railroad tracks . Alarmed by the sound of an oncoming train , tells the giant to repair the tracks . The attempts this , but takes too long , causing the train to collide with his head . Hogarth hides the damaged robot in their barn where he discovers the robot is self repairing . Later that night , Hogarth returns to the barn with a stack of comic books to read to the . The is impressed with , but distressed when he discovers a comic about an evil robot ; tells the that he can be " who you choose to be " . Investigating the destroyed substation , government agent discovers evidence of the and decides to continue his inquiries in nearby . Finding a gun left near the substation the night he found the , takes up a room for rent at 's home and trails the boy to learn more . He is paranoid about an alien invasion and alerts the to the possible presence of the . Worried that they will get caught , Hogarth evades and takes the to beatnik artist , who passes off the robot as one of his works of scrap - metal art when and investigate . Once and are gone , Hogarth plays with the using a toy gun , but inadvertently causes the to activate a defence mechanism . saves and angrily commands the to leave , but , believing the never meant to harm him , gives chase . sees the toy gun and realizes that the was reacting defensively against the gun . He catches up with Hogarth on his motorbike and they chase after the before he can reach the town . In , the saves two boys , instantly getting on the good side of the bewildered citizen witnesses , and leading to the telling that he chooses not to be a gun . Unfortunately , the is seen by the military and attacked . The flees with until he is shot down by a missile fired from an F-86 . After crash - landing , the thinks that the unconscious is dead ; enraged , it activates a massive arsenal of energy weapons and attacks the , who are no match for the 's advanced firepower . lies to that the robot killed , before telling him to lure the out to sea so they can destroy it with a nuclear ballistic missile from the . Hogarth wakes up and pacifies the , easing him to deactivate his weapons . He then shows himself to and his men . , after listening to 's explanation of the and realizing that lied to him , is about to tell the to stand down , but snatches the walkie - talkie and orders the to launch the missile . Realizing the deadly mistake , lambastes and informs him that the missile will vapourize not only the , but everyone in as well . tries to escape to save himself , but the stops him and he is arrested by the . When tells the about 's fate , the flies off to intercept the missile . With a smile of satisfaction , comparing himself to , the collides with the missile , causing a massive explosion high up in the atmosphere . The people of the town recognize the as a hero , but everyone , especially , is deeply saddened by the 's sacrifice.\\nSome time later , and start a relationship and builds a statue honoring the . Hogarth receives a package from , containing the only piece of the they found , a small jaw bolt . That night , Hogarth awakens to a familiar beeping coming from the bolt , which is trying to get out his window . He realizes the is still alive and repairing himself somewhere , and he opens the window to let the bolt out . On the Langj\\xc3\\xb6kull glacier in , various parts of the robot approach the snowdrift where the head rests , eyes glowing , as the wakes up and smiles.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > is named after the character played by who has lived in the Mongolian/ countryside since birth . When he wanders into a Russian exploration party led by . ( ) the captain hires the curious person as a guide . The old tells the foreigners stories about the land proving to them that he can out - hunt and out - shoot the best of them , and managing to save the life of the captain during one snow storm . The soldiers develop a deep respect and affection for and . brings the man into his home in the city to live with him and his wife and son bringing to the family an exposure to stories and a way of living that they could not gain from anywhere else in their city life . The domesticated lifestyle does n't suit whose daily activities clash with the local constabulary . decides to go back to the untamed land and gives him his best rifle to take with him . Eventaully seeks out his old comrade but discovers that fate has intervened.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > In civil - rights era , , 23 - year - old " " ( ) , a recent graduate of the of and an aspiring writer , attends a bridge game at the home of her friend ( ) . 's girlhood friends have all gotten married and started families , but is disturbed to see how they treat their African American maids . 's maid , ( ) , fields a call from " white trash " ( ) , who wants to help with a benefit being organized by the . and fellow socialite ( ) , head of the local chapter , laugh at 's efforts to be accepted , as they do n't think she 's up to their social standards . ( We learn later that 's married to 's former boyfriend , which might have something to do with 's attitude . ) mentions to that she 's looking for a maid . After refusing to use 's toilet because uses it ( " they carry different diseases than we do ! " ) , Hilly describes the she hopes to get passed in the state legislature . The bill would require white - owned homes to have a separate toilet for the " help . " This conversation is conducted within earshot of . has been assigned to write the housekeeping column for the local newspaper . Because she has never had to do much housework herself , she asks for assistance . In addition to doing all the cooking and cleaning for 's family , is the de facto mother of 's toddler daughter , ( and ) , for whom shows heart - rendingly little concern . Every day tells , " You is kind . You is smart . You is important . gets home , her mother , ( ) , is trying on a dress . gets to try it on and bugs her about still being single . mentions the job she landed , and her mother frets that she 'll never get married . asks whether is attracted to women , as she 's " heard of an herbal remedy than can cure such ' unnatural ' urges . " is horrified . At dinner that night makes a rude remark about liking girls and her mother excuses herself from the table because has upset her cancerous ulcer . runs to a favorite spot outdoors , a small bench under a tree , and remembers how ( ) , the maid who raised her from a child , comforted her when she was n't asked to a dance . desperately misses , who according to quit while was away at college . can tell there 's more to the story , but no one will say what really happened . Disturbed by the sudden loss of and at how and Hilly treat their own maids with bigoted condescension , conceives a writing project : a book about the lives of 's maids . She describes the project to ( ) , an editor in , and receives lukewarm encouragement ; doubts that any maids will agree to participate . approaches about the book , but declines to be interviewed . 's maid , ( ) , disobeys Hilly 's order not to use the family 's bathroom during a violent thunderstorm that makes a trip to the outhouse dangerous . Hilly fires her over the objections of her own mother , ( ) . In retaliation , makes a chocolate pie into which she has baked her own feces , and takes it to in a fake act of contrition . While Hilly greedily eats two slices , she asks why her mother ca n't have a slice , to which explains that it 's a " special pie , just for . " A moment later tells , " Eat my shit ! " Hilly asks if 's lost her mind , and replies , " No , ma'am , but you is about to . 'Cause you just did . " 's mother laughs and laughs and Hilly retaliates by having her mother committed to a nursing home . Later that night , 's husband beats her while listens on the phone . At church the next day , hears a sermon about courage and changing her mind , resolves to help with her book . She tearfully recounts to and the story of her son 's death years before : At age twenty - four , 's son was run over by a truck at his workplace . The white foreman drove him to a colored hospital , dumped him on the ground , honked the horn , and left . By that point it was too late to save him , so brought him home , where he died on the sofa right before her eyes . She expresses her pain , saying " The anniversary of his death comes every year , and every year I ca n't breathe . But to you all , it 's just another day of bridge . " She becomes even more invested in the dangerous book project . Meanwhile goes to work for , who 's had no luck breaking into the social set and is therefore somewhat isolated . pays under the table because she does n't want her husband to know that she has no domestic skills . Although she is generally suspicious of white people , finds herself becoming more comfortable around , who is bubbly and treats with respect , but is deeply insecure . improves 's dismal cooking skills by teaching her how to make fried chicken on her first day . They bond further when suffers her fourth miscarriage . While helps her into bed and soothes her , is overwrought . She reveals that she married her husband ( ) because she was pregnant , but quickly lost the baby and has n't told him about the three failed pregnancies that followed . She worries that she will never be able to have children . 's new maid , ( ) , explains to her employer that her twin sons have graduated high school and that she and her husband have been saving for years to send them to college . However , they are short $ 75 on one tuition , and are on the verge of having to choose which son can go . respectfully asks Hilly for a loan , saying that she will gladly work for free until the loan is paid off . Hilly refuses , explaining that it 's " the Christian thing " to do because does not give charity to those who are well and able . While vacuuming 's living room later , finds a ring , which she pockets and later tries to pawn , hoping to get the tuition money . Hilly finds out and has arrested at the bus stop in front of the other maids , all of whom are deeply shaken by the event . Aibileen recruits a reluctant into the book project , but ( who 's warming to the idea ) insists the book will need at least a dozen voices -- including the story of 's own relationship with . After 's arrest , nearly all the local maids volunteer to help with the book . Though she has changed the names of everyone involved , remains concerned that people will recognize the maids and create more trouble for the community in the wake of the recent murder of . insists that they include the story about and the chocolate pie -- which she refers to as her " terrible awful " -- as insurance against being identified ; an embarrassed will not want anyone to know that she ingested her maid 's feces and will do all she can to convince everyone that the book is n't about . Hilly has several times directed , who writes the newsletter , to include an item about her proposed " sanitation initiative , " but keeps putting her off . Now Hilly adds an item about a charity coat drive , the coats for which are to be dropped off at 's house . includes both items , but changes " coats " to something else . The next day gets a call and rushes herself , , and Aibileen over to 's , where Hilly is screaming , " I told her to write ' coats ' ! Not ' commodes ' ! " On 's lawn are about 40 toilets . While Hilly continues her histrionics , innocently sits on a toilet and slaps her till she sobs . runs to , who holds her and whispers , " You is kind . You is smart . You is important . "Skeeter eventually pries the story of 's departure out of her mother : fired because 's daughter ( ) refused to use the back door and embarrassed while she was hosting an important luncheon . regretted it and tried to get to come back , going so far as to send her son , 's brother , to 's new home in , but by the time he got there , had died . 's book The Help is published anonymously , and soon everyone in is reading it . True to 's prediction , is horrified to find the chocolate pie story therein and goes out of her way to assure her friends that The Help is n't about . splits the advance she receives evenly among all the maids , promising that more is on the way . She 's offered a job at the publishing house in , which she is disinclined to take , but and insist that she must . ( ) , whom has been dating , breaks up with when he finds out it was she who wrote The Help . Hilly also figures out who wrote the book and storms over to 's house in a drunken fury . She threatens to tell 's mother , but kicks Hilly off her property after insulting her and insinuating she knows about the pie . tells to take the job in , which does , and tells her she 's proud of her . works hard to prepare a lavish meal for in gratitude for all she has done . 's husband , who has known all along that is working for , tells she will have a job with them for as long as she wants it . Inspired , leaves her abusive husband , taking their children with her . One of the final scenes shows Hilly taking in her mail . One item is a check for $ 200 , a donation from to the benefit . When she sees that the check is made out to " Two - , " she throws a tantrum and tears it up . Hilly , falsely claiming that has stolen some silverware , browbeats the weak - willed into firing . When alone with , Hilly cruelly tells her that while she can not send to jail for her involvement in the book , she can send her " for being a thief . " Aibileen snaps and finally stands up to , calling her a " godless woman " for her false accusations and for her conniving and backstabbing ways , at which Hilly bursts into tears of rage and leaves . begs not to leave her . They share a tearful goodbye , during which repeats her affirming mantra : " You is kind . You is smart . You is important . " shows a rare glimpse of emotion , tearing up as she watches bang on the window , crying for to return . As she walks away , promises herself that she will become a writer , as her son had encouraged her to do.</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > A street peddler ( ) is guiding the audience through the streets of the fictional Arabian city of . After trying to sell all kinds of wares , he pulls out an old oil lamp , claiming it " once changed the course of a young man 's life . A young man who like this lamp was more than what he seemed ; a diamond , in the rough . "The peddler then begins to tell the tale , beginning on a dark night , where the 's grand vizier , ( ) , has a secret meeting with a thief named . Kassim hands over half a golden scarab beetle , of which already possess the other half . Putting both halves together , the golden scarab beetle comes to life and flies off into the night , followed by and . The golden bug then settles on a sand dune which turns into a giant sand tiger with its mouth wide opened ; the of . orders to enter the cave and retrieve a lamp . However , upon approaching the cave , the tiger 's head speaks that only one may enter : " One whose worth lies far within ; the diamond in the rough ! " still attempts to enter but as soon as he takes one step inside the tiger 's mouth , it bites down on the thief , killing him instantly and closing off the entrance way . The golden scarab beetle then turns back into both halves which collects . It is then that understands he needs to find this diamond in the rough in order to enter . The next day , on the streets of , a young street urchin named ( ) is struggling to steal a loaf of bread , along with his pet monkey , . After outwitting some of the city guards , the two settle down to eat their spoils , but ends up giving it away to a couple of hungry kids struggling to find any food . They are then distracted when a marches through the streets , en route to the 's palace to claim the 's hand . gets into a confrontation with the prince when he tries to punish two kids who mistakenly walked in front of his horse , causing it to stop abruptly . The prince kicks into a puddle of dirt and declares to be nothing but " a worthless street rat . " and then retire to their abode , with promising his monkey friend that someday , things will be better . The next day , the prince leaves the palace , angered that ( ) has fended off his advances , allowing her pet tiger to rip out the suitor 's pant . The ( ) talks to his daughter , who says she is tired of living her life being cooped up behind walls . The consults with his adviser , , who claims he can help the , if the will give him his blue diamond ring . Using hypnosis on the , gets the ring , and retreats to his private quarters . Later on that evening , escapes from the palace , and wanders the streets of the next day . However , her act of giving an apple to a hungry little boy lands her in trouble with the street merchant she took if from , not realizing she would 've to pay for it . Luckily , interferes and cons the merchant into believing he got his apple back . He then leads away from the market and away from further trouble . Meanwhile , has used the blue diamond ring he stole from the to consult the of , which revealed just who he needs to enter the of Wonders : . has retreated with to his and 's place , and she is rather taken by his kindness . However , is suddenly attacked and captured by the city . reveals herself to them , demanding be released but the head of the , , tells her he is acting under orders from . Returning to the , confronts , who explains that was captured because he kidnapped her . When reveals she escaped the palace on her own and had nothing to do with it , shockingly claims that has already been executed , sending her away in tears . In actuality , has been imprisoned in the dungeons . Abu manages to free , but they are interrupted by an older prisoner , claiming he needs 's help to locate the of . In truth the prisoner is actually in , who manages to help escape the dungeons . After the small group arrives at the of , is allowed to enter , with the cave warning him not to touch anything but the lamp . and venture deep into the cavern which is filled with many treasures of gold , jewelries , gems and all kind of luxuries , where they first encounter a sentient magic carpet that leads them to the lamp 's location . is able to retrieve the lamp , but breaks the rule , and picks up a large ruby , causing the cave to begin to collapse on them . Using the magic carpet , and manage to get to the entrance of the cave , where the old beggar pleads for to give him the lamp . does so , and the beggar then reveals a dagger , intending to kill him . Luckily , bites the beggar , and both and fall back into the cavern , as the giant 's disappears under the sand once again . then laughingly reaches for the lamp , only to find it is gone . managed to steal it off the beggar before he fell back into the cave with . Deep within the cave , begins to examine the lamp , finding a worn inscription on the side of it . Rubbing it , the lamp then produces a large blue genie . The genie ( ) tells that for rubbing the lamp , he is entitled to three wishes ( and that wishing for more wishes is also not an option ) , but warns that they come with the following exceptions:1 ) He ca n't kill anyone.\\n2 ) He ca n't make anyone fall in love with someone else.\\n3 ) He ca n't bring people back from the dead . Using his street - smarts , manages to con into getting them out of the cave without using a wish . Landing in a small oasis , contemplates what to wish for , and asks the what he would wish for . The mentions how he 'd wish to be free of the lamp , prompting to promise to free the with his last wish . As the topic turns to 's wishes , he thinks of wanting to be with , and though he can not make her fall in love with him , he decides to wish to become a prince , as she is a princess , thus allowing him to at least try to be with her . uses his first wish ; the genie will turn him into a fabulously rich prince . is transformed into a large elephant and will be 's mount . Meanwhile , back in , is still upset that he did n't get the lamp . Wanting to find some way to attain power , attempts to convince the that there is a clause in the rules that if has not been suitably we d by a certain time , she is to marry the great vizier to save faces . The is reluctant to proceed so attempts to hypnotize him but he is interrupted by loud music coming from outside . Outside , a large and noisy procession enters the , announcing the arrival of ( aka ) . The procession is huge , with riches , exotic animals , hundreds of servants and himself riding an elephant ( ) . 's entourage makes its way into the palace , impressing the . is suspicious and cold toward the new suitor . is the taken to , who is unimpressed and rebuffs 's pompous ways . However , when removes his hat to shoo away , is reminded of the street urchin . tries to gain 's interest again by telling her how rich and powerful he is but she remains steadfastly ambivalent . decides to leave and steps off on his magic carpet which definitely gets her attention . wishes to ride with him and the two take a long trip around the world . drops his pompous facade during the trip which eventually wins her over . Returning to the palace , is roughly seized by palace guards who tie him up and dump him in a nearby lake under orders from . When he accidentally rubs the lamp , appears and coaxes into using his second wish to save the boy 's life . returns to the palace to find that is using his cobra - shaped staff to once again to hypnotize the , demanding that he order his daughter to marry the treacherous vizier . figures out 's schemes and smashes the staff . vanishes before the palace guards can arrest him , but not before spotting the lamp hidden inside 's hat . After he 's gone , the sees that has accepted and wishes to marry him . However , is still troubled by the fact that he 's not a real prince and has been lying to the princess . appears and tries to coax into using his last wish to free him . tells him he ca n't free the as he would n't be the prince that he is without him , convinced he would lose if he 's proven not to be a prince . The suddenly retreats into the lamp , feeling angry and betrayed . returns to his secret lair beneath the palace , seemingly defeated but laughing hysterically when he realizes who really is . He then sends his pet parrot ( ) to steal the lamp which he does rather easily . summons the . is forced to do 's bidding and appears in a gigantic form , grabbing the palace and taking it to a remote mountain . uses his first wish to become the world 's most powerful sorcerer and reveals to everyone that is nothing but a street urchin . He launches him out of the palace in a makeshift rocket which lands in a snowy cold mountain region . then uses his second wish to become and imprisons the and the princess until she agrees to marry him . Trapped in the mountains , finds and the magic carpet and is able to return to , sneaking into the palace . He finds the , who warns him he ca n't help him since holds the lamp . tries to sneak up on to steal back the lamp . sees 's plan and uses 's wish for her to be in love with him as an excuse to pretend being suddenly enraptured with to distract him . However , sees 's reflection in 's tiara and knocks him away . He then traps in a large hourglass where she will eventually be submerged in sand and die . transforms himself into a giant cobra to terrorize , who fights back valiantly . While trapped in 's coils , has an epiphany and cons into using his third wish : telling that no matter how powerful he gets , the will still be more powerful . falls for the ruse and wishes to be turned into a genie himself , which complies . then changes form which frees so he can run to 's hourglass and break her out before she suffocates . As revels in his newfound power , reminds him that being a also means becoming a servant to holds the lamp . is suddenly shackled and is sucked into the new lamp created by his wish and is trapped . takes the lamp and throws it out into the desert , where it lands in the of as the new lamp . The genie then tells that if he wants to use his third wish to become a prince again he can . , however , wishes the genie free . The lamp becomes inactive and the genie 's shackles fall off his wrists . Overjoyed that he 's no longer a servant , the plans to travel the world . The , knowing that is not a prince , decides to let him marry his daughter after seeing how much and care for each other . is changed back into his monkey form and the leaves after an emotional goodbye . and the princess are married and becomes heir to the kingdom . They fly away on 's carpet toward the moon , which turns into the laughing genie 's face . Suddenly the film is lifted up by the who says " Made ya look!!".</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > The story begins with the assassination of " " ( ) in , on 30 , 1948 when he is shot by a young man three times in his chest . The following funeral procession is a long one and his body is conveyed on a jeep covered in flowers . The story flashes back to 's early days as an attorney in 1893 in . He is thrown off a train by the racist conductor for sitting in the segregated first - class compartment despite possessing a ticket to be there . He later stages a non - violent protest in the center of town where , with several police officers and officials present , he burns work permits that all non - Afrikaners are required to carry and present to police when demanded . 's reasoning is that the permits are an unfair and oppressive symbol of Afrikaner rule over minorities . As he burns them , he is struck by a police officer on the hand . Though quite plainly in pain , continues to burn the permits , his will overcoming the blows from the officer . He is finally knocked down , unable to continue his protest and is arrested . meets personally with ( ) , the Dutch commander of . admires 's adherence to non - violent protest and frees him , saying he 'll rescind the pass law for foreigners . When he 's freed from jail , reunites with his wife and children . He also meets a young British priest , ( ) , with whom he converses about the oppression of the masses by a handful of bureaucrats . While they walk , is confronted by an angry youth ( - in a bit part ) and his friends . They demand that he pay them to walk down their street . refuses in the face of obvious bigotry . When the young man 's mother calls him inside , and continue down the street . In 1915 , travels back to his home country of . When he arrives there he is met by members of the press who know of his exploits in . They ask if he 'll take up any political causes , especially those in opposition to the British rule of . politely refuses the requests , saying he 's only going to his home city of . His wife accompanies him . 's real plan is to organize a non - violent protest against , knowing that millions of will follow him . Very soon realizes that the British rule of is harsh and oppressive , having grown more so since he left to pursue his law degree and is growing worse each day . One of 's first public protests is against the British textile industry . He urges his followers to weave their own homespun cloth for clothing and other needs and burn the British cloth they 've been forced to buy and wear for decades . However , many , both and , stage more aggressive protests . The crowds become angry mobs when they are attacked by the police . appears inwardly angry that his message has been misunderstood . He is later arrested by the on charges of inciting the violence of his people . When he stands before the judge -- who himself stands in respect when enters the court chamber -- he refuses to comply with the judge 's decree to merely impose a fine on the defendant . The judge , though showing great respect for the defendant , sentences to serve time in prison for several years . A few years later in 1919 , in , a city in , a group of Indian citizens gather in the garden to protest an unfair town curfew . Though the protest was peaceful , a British general , ( ) , orders his troops into the garden . They take up firing positions in the courtyard . When one of his lieutenants suggests that the protest is peaceful , the racist says that the people have " had their warning " and commands his troops to open fire . Thousands , including women and children , are killed . A trial is held by the , comprised of British and Indian officials . Dyer himself testifies and is at first quite proud and defiant , claiming he wished to " inflict a lesson that would be felt through all of the " . When asked if he 'd ordered his troops to fire at the thickest part of the crowd , he says yes . He also states he would have used the machine gun on the tank that accompanied his troops ( it was unable to fit through the narrow passage to the garden ) . When an Indian attorney asks if he attempted to help the wounded in any way , he becomes agitated and says he would have . A British official asks him how a wounded child that had been shot would be able to approach him for help . Dyer is silent . Nevertheless , the incident generates great attention , and faces intense public pressure . , and several other officials representative of the Indian state and it 's people , , and other cultures alike , meet with British nationals . tells them that they are " masters in someone else 's home " and they should leave forever . The argue that without their rule , will likely tear itself apart . retorts that there will be problems but they will be 's problems , not the . Though continues his wish for civil disobedience , riots continue to break out . stages a personal fast as a means of protest . Though his action is successful , violence continues . In 1931 , stages his most famous protest : the . He marches 240 miles from his home to the ocean to make salt in defiance of British regulations . The march is a great success and further disrupts British rule . continues his diplomacy with the other heads of the Indian state to insure that when gains it 's sovereignty that all the faiths of the country , chiefly and , will live together peacefully . After ends , finally grants Indian independence in 1947 with becoming a commonwealth . celebrate this victory , but their troubles are far from over . The country is subsequently divided by religion . It is decided that the northwest region and the eastern part of ( current - day ) around , both places where are in the majority , will become a new country called . It is hoped that by encouraging the to live in a separate country , violence will abate . is opposed to the idea , and is even willing to allow Muslim leader ( ) to become the first prime minister of , but the of is carried out nevertheless with becoming the - of the of . Religious tensions between and erupt into nationwide violence . Horrified , declares another hunger strike in the city of , saying he will not eat until the fighting stops . The fighting does stop eventually . While weak and barely able to speak , he is confronted by a man who confesses that while enraged over the death of his young son at the hands of , he killed a young Muslim boy himself . tells the man how to achieve forgiveness : he must find a young boy whose own parents have been killed and raise the boy as his own -- but the boy must be a and the man must raise him as one . The aged and in ill - health 78 - year - old ( aware that he might not live through the year ) spends his last days in 1948 trying to bring about peace between both nations . He thereby angers many protesters on both sides , one of whom ( ) is involved in a conspiracy to assassinate him . As shoots in a scene recalling the opening , the film cuts to black and is heard in a voiceover , saying " Oh , ! " The audience then sees 's cremation ; the film ending with a scene of 's ashes being scattered on the holy . As this happens , viewers hear in another voiceover from earlier in the film:"When I despair , I remember that all through history the way of truth and love has always won . There have been tyrants , and murderers , and for a time they can seem invincible , but , in the end , they always fall . Think of it . Always . "</synopsis > 

 < synopsis > During a battle in , ( ) learns that his injured leg is to be amputated . Seeing the plight of fellow soldiers with amputated legs , refuses amputation and steals a nearby horse . He attempts suicide by riding a horse across the line of fire , between the opposing and positions , who have been in a stalemate for days . His action has the unexpected effect of rallying his comrades , who storm the distracted and win the battle . After the ensuing battle , an experienced general 's surgeon saves 's leg . The commanding officer recognizes as a hero and gives him , the horse who carried him in battle , and offers his choice of posting . , anxious to see the American frontier before it disappears due to mass settlement from the , requests transfer west . After meeting with ( ) , who has slipped into delusions of grandeur ( apparently believing he is a king and a medieval knight ) , he is paired with a drayage teamster named ( ) , who conveys to his post . Immediately after meets leaves with , commits suicide with his pistol . After a scenic journey , and arrive with fresh supplies at the , finding it deserted except for a lone wolf that later befriends and dubs Two , because of the coloring of its front legs . , while waiting for reinforcements to arrive , sets about bringing order the deserted post , left in complete disarray by its previous occupants . Meanwhile , , while returning to their point of departure , is ambushed by and scalped . Timmons ' death and the suicide of the major who sent them there prevents officers from knowing of 's assignment to the post , effectively isolating . remains unaware of the full situation and its implications . He notes in his journal how strange it is that no more soldiers join him at the post . initially encounters neighbors when the tribe 's medicine man , ( ) , happens upon the fort while bathes out of sight , and , assuming it abandoned , attempts to capture . After a naked scares off , he is confronted by an aggressive warrior named in His ( A. ) , who declares that he is not scared of the white man . Wind in His and his compatriots ' attempt to capture ends in failure when the horse throws off his would - be thief . Eventually , establishes a rapport with , but the language barrier frustrates them . Believing that he should take the initiative in establishing communication with the tribe , dresses himself in his uniform and rides out to meet them . On the way , interrupts the suicide attempt of With A ( ) , a white woman captured by the tribe as a child and recently widowed . Eventually and in His visit at the fort and realize that the lieutenant wants to know where to find herds of , the first word that they share . finds himself drawn to the lifestyle and customs of the tribe , and becomes a hero among the and accepted as an honorary member of the tribe after he helps them locate a migrating herd of , which they depend upon as a source of food , material , and clothing . further helps defend the settlement against a raiding party , providing the warriors with surplus rifles and ammunition which he 'd buried near the fort . He eventually is accepted as a full member of the tribe . After members of the tribe witness him playing with Two , he is named ( " Dances with Wolves " ; means large coyote , the word for ) . falls in love with With , a relationship forbidden by the recent death of her husband in battle but consummated in secret . The two eventually win the approval of , who takes on the role of her father , and marry . subsequently spends more time living with the tribe than manning his post at . Wind In His , his last rival , acknowledges him as a friend . 's idyll ends when he tells that white men will continue to invade their land in " numbers like the stars . " They tell ( ' ' ) , who shows them a 's helmet that had been in his family for generations . The chief decides it is time to move the village to its winter camp . As the packing finishes , realizes that his journal , left behind at the deserted fort , is a blueprint for finding the tribe , revealing that he knows far too much about their ways . Wearing Indian clothing , he returns to to retrieve the journal but finds it is has suddenly been occupied by newly arrived troops . They see and initially assuming he is an Indian , kill his horse and capture . When they recognize as a white man , they treat him as a deserter , punishable by death . tells ( ) ( whom met earlier in 's office ) that he has a journal containing his orders for his posting to . ( ) , one of the first soldiers to arrive at the fort , denies the existence of the journal , which he had found and has in his pocket . After further beating , declares in the language that his name is With . Army officers and a few troops set off to deliver to for execution . When they happen upon Two , they shoot at the wolf , who refuses to leave . Despite his attempts to intervene , Two is fatally wounded , is hit in the head again and the convoy moves off . Soon after , Wind In His and other warriors from the tribe attack the column of men , rescuing . A ( His Horse ) retrieves 's journal floating in a stream . After returning to the winter camp , realizes that as a deserter and fugitive , he will continue to draw the unwelcome attention of the and endanger the welfare of the tribe if he stays with the . Under the protests of his friends , decides that he must leave the tribe , saying he must speak to those who would listen . His wife decides to accompany him . As Dances With and Stands With A leave the camp , Wind In His cries out that Dances with Wolves will always be his friend , a remembrance of their first confrontation . Shortly afterward , a column of cavalry and army scouts arrive to find their former camp site empty.</synopsis > 

 